

ENGLISH FOR TODAY
Classes Nine and Ten
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes nine and ten from the academic year 2013
English For Today
Classes Nine and Ten
Revised for the year 2026
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH

Published by
National Curriculum & Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the publisher]
First edition written and edited by
M S Hoque
AMM Hamidur Rahman
Goutam Roy
Raihana Shams
Md. Zulfeqar Haider
Surajit Roy Majumder
Md Abdur Razzaque
Naina Shahzadi
First Publication : October, 2012
Revised Edition : September, 2014
Revised Edition : September, 2017
Revised Edition : November, 2020
Revised Edition : October, 2024
Revised Edition : October, 2025
For free distribution from academic year 2010 by the Government of the
Peoples Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :

Preface
The importance of formal education is diversified. The prime goal of modern education
is not only to impart knowledge but rather to build a prosperous nation by developing
skilled human resources. At the same time, education is the best means of developing a
society that is free from superstitions and adheres to science and facts. To stand as a
developed nation in the science and technology-driven world of the 21st century, we
need to ensure quality education. A well-planned education is essential for enabling our
new generation to face the challenges of the age and to motivate them with the strength
of patriotism, values, and ethics. In this context, the government is determined to
ensure education as per the demand of the age.
Education is the backbone of a nation and a curriculum provides the essence of formal
education. Again, the most important tool for implementing a curriculum is the
textbook. The National Curriculum 2012 has been adopted to achieve the goals of the
National Education Policy 2010. In light of this, the National Curriculum and Textbook
Board (NCTB) has been persistently working on developing, printing, and distributing
quality textbooks. This organisation also works to review and revise the curriculum,
textbooks, and assessment methods according to needs and realities.
Secondary education is a vital stage in our education system. This textbook is catered
to the age, aptitude, and endless inquisitiveness of the students at this level, as well as
to achieve the aims and objectives of the curriculum. It is believed that the book written
and meticulously edited by experienced and skilled teachers and experts will be
conducive to a joyful experience for the students. It is hoped that the book will play a
significant role in promoting creative and aesthetic spirits among students along with
subject knowledge and skills.
Due to globalization, rapid communication, and digitalization, the need and importance
of English is increasing. English is one of the powerful tools for pursuing higher study,
using technology, developing interpersonal communication, and accessing local and
global job markets. The curriculum makes it explicit that language learning will be
graded and contents will replicate real-life contexts to enhance language learning for
communication. The English For Today textbooks have been developed to help
students attain communicative competence in English with particular attention to the
development of the four language skills i.e. listening, speaking, reading and writing. It
may be mentioned here that the textbook has been reviewed and revised for the
academic year 2026. It is mentionable here that the last version of the textbook
developed according to the curriculum 2012 has been taken as the basis. Meticulous
attention has been paid to the textbook to make it more learner-friendly and free from
errors. However, any suggestions for further improvement of this book will be
appreciated.
Finally, I would like to thank all of those who have contributed to the book as writers,
editors, reviewers, illustrators and graphic designers.
October, 2025 Professor Robiul Kabir Chowdhury
Chairman (Additional Charge)
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh

Contents

Unit One
= _ - . পপ ___
শী রিতা দিন টু আর
ay, peat Dap ae a :
= amit Seti a ৮5০ " পলি
রশ ্ a. war Oe ae  ri ca .
~ হী
os age! পে পুটকি লরি
SOR
Be
এ পিস. কক Vea
Source: Internet
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
৬ understand our position as humans
e recognise our responsibilities towards society and culture
e define our relationship with humans and the natural world at large

2 English For Today
Lesson 1: Mr. Moti by Rahad Abir
Economy and education are two major factors that segregate people in a
society. Mr. Moti is a story by a Bangladeshi writer Rahad Abir. Read the
two sections of the story and try to understand the identity of people
belonging to different social classes. Also, think about how the human world
and animals/birds are inter-related.
Ameen is seventeen when the war breaks out. One Monday, after supper, he
announces he will go to war. Sonabhan shrieks in surprise, You want to leave me
alone?
Tt wont take long? Ma, he assures her. Ill be back soon after the training
That night Sonabhan cannot sleep.
After sun-up, she opens the duck coop. The flock streams out, stretches and
quacks around her for their morning meal. She takes longer than usual. She
mixes water with rice husks in an earthen bowl and puts it down. They gobble it
up in five minutes and head for the pond.
Ameen has let out the chickens by then. He lifts his 12-week-old cockerel, Moti,
and sits on the veranda. During his breakfast he doesnt strike up any
conversation. Having noticed Sonabhans puffy eyes, he knows not to mention
last nights subject. He casts his glance to the side, down at the cockerel eating
rice in silence.
Today is haat bar, market day. Sonabhan has arranged the things Ameen will take
to the bazaar to sell. Two dozen eggs, a sheaf of areca nuts, a bottle gourd. The
bazaar is about a mile away.
Ameen wears his short-sleeved floral shirt over his lungi. He whistles as he
looks into the cloudy mirror to comb his hair. Placing the rattan basket on his
head before setting off, he hollers: Im off, Ma
Sonabhan watches him go along the bank of the little river. For the first time it
occurs to her that Ameen has grown up. He has reached the height of his dead
father, has his long neck and straight shoulders.
Xo
A
নব

Sense of Self 3
In that moment, Sonabhan realizes its not the war, its the fighting that Ameen
is fascinated with. Like his dead father, he is crazy about bullfighting,
cockfighting and boat racing. The same stubbornness flows in his blood. Once
he decides on something, nothing can stop him.
Her little son! Now a man. Even up to his fifteenth birthday barely a day passed
without neighbours appearing with a slew of complaints. Sometimes one or two
turned up from other villages. They peeked into the house and asked, Does
Ameen live here?
Sonabhan would sigh, What did he do?
Your son stole my date juice! Emptied the juice pots hanging on the date trees!
Sonabhan would sigh again. Then ask the visitor to pardon him. She hated
saying that shed raised her son alone. If she could spare them, she would bring
half a dozen eggs and hand them to the visitor: Please take these for your
children?
At night, Sonabhan climbs out of her bed, clutches the hurricane lamp and
tiptoes into Ameens room. She stands by his bed, looks at her sleeping son. He
snores like his father. He has her light skin and button nose. She touches his
cheek. His broad forehead. She suppresses a desire to lie beside him. Like the
old days, when she slept cuddling her baby.
ন ন স

A warning comes from old Chowkidars young wife. Watch your rooster, she
threatens. I dont want him in my house again.
If someone touches my boy, Sonabhan responds, TheyII see the consequences.
She grounds Moti for an entire day. It makes him sad. His forlorn captivity
crucifies her. She sets him loose the following morning.
Some boys come and ask Sonabhan to lend them Moti for cockfighting at a fair.
They are happy to pay.
Never, she tells them. He is my son
Monday dawns without Motis crowing. His cold body is resting on its right
side. Lying against the basket. Eyes closed. His kingly head down.

২৩

নে

নি

4 English For Today

With Motis basket in her lap, Sonabhan is motionless.

She puts Moti to rest beside her husbands grave. She sighs, plods across the

empty yard, steps onto an empty veranda, crawls into an empty home and sits on

the edge of an empty bed.

Another morning breaks.... Noon and afternoon come and go....The birds in the

coops quack and crow....No one lets them out. For the first time, Sonabhans

doors do not open.

Note: The excerpts of Mr. Moti are selected from the complete story included

in When the Mango Tree Blossomed: Fifty Short Stories from Bangladesh edited

by Niaz Zaman.

A. Answer the following questions:

1. Why is the rooster called Mr. Moti?

2. Is the writer trying to compare the son with the rooster? What
are the reasons for doing so?

3. Why is the story a Bangladeshi story? Which war is referred to
in the story?

4. Do you know what cockfighting is?

5. What do you think about the mother-son relationship?

B. Make a list of words from the story that have cultural
connotations. Make use of them in a conversation between two
friends in your class.

C. In our culture, sons are believed to follow their fathers
ways and daughters are found similar with their mothers. Do you
see that kind of belief in the story? Discuss it with your friends
and bring examples from your own life if you are compared with
your father or mother.

D. Arrange a debate on the motion:

Man is known by his work, not by his looks.
২
২
NX

Sense of Self 5
Lesson 2: Girl by Jamaica Kincaid
Lets read the following story and answer the following questions.
Wash the white clothes on Monday and put them on the stone heap; wash the
color clothes on Tuesday and put them on the clothesline to dry; dont walk
barehead in the hot sun; cook pumpkin fritters in very hot sweet oil; soak your
little cloths right after you take them off; when buying cotton to make yourself a
nice blouse, be sure that it doesnt have gum in it, because that way it wont hold
up well after a wash; soak salt fish overnight before you cook it; is it true that
you sing benna in Sunday school?; always eat your food in such a way that it
won't turn someone elses stomach; on Sundays try to walk like a lady and not
like the slut you are so bent on becoming; dont sing benna in Sunday school;
you mustnt speak to wharf-rat boys, not even to give directions; dont eat fruits
on the streetflies will follow you; but I don t sing benna on Sundays at all and
never in Sunday school; this is how to sew on a button; this is how to make a
buttonhole for the button you have just sewed on; this is how to hem a dress
when you see the hem coming down and so to prevent yourself from looking like
the slut I know you are so bent on becoming; this is how you iron your fathers
khaki shirt so that it doesnt have a crease; this is how you iron your fathers
khaki pants so that they dont have a crease; this is how you grow okrafar
from the house, because okra tree harbors red ants; when you are growing
dasheen, make sure it gets plenty of water or else it makes your throat itch when
you are eating it; this is how you sweep a corner; this is how you sweep a whole
house; this is how you sweep a yard; this is how you smile to someone you dont
like too much; this is how you smile to someone you dont like at all; this is how
you smile to someone you like completely; this is how you set a table for tea; this
is how you set a table for dinner; this is how you set a table for dinner with an
important guest; this is how you set a table for lunch; this is how you set a table
for breakfast; this is how to behave in the presence of men who dont know you
very well, and this way they wont recognize immediately the slut I have warned
you against becoming; be sure to wash every day, even if it is with your own spit;
dont squat down to play marblesyou are not a boy, you know; dont pick
peoples flowersyou might catch something; dont throw stones at blackbirds,
because it might not be a blackbird at all; this is how to make a bread pudding;
this is how to make doukona; this is how to make pepper pot; this is how to make
রর a good medicine for a cold; this is how to catch a fish; this is how to throw
q

6 English For Today
back a fish you dont like, and that way something bad wont fall on you; this
is how to bully a man; this is how a man bullies you; this is how to love a
man, and if this doesnt work there are other ways, and if they dont work dont
feel too bad about giving up; this is how to spit up in the air if you feel like it,
and this is how to move quick so that it doesnt fall on you; this is how to make
ends meet; always squeeze bread to make sure its fresh; but what if the baker
won t let me feel the bread?; you mean to say that after all you are really going
to be the kind of woman who the baker wont let near the bread?

A. Answer the following questions:

1. 1518. 51015 about a mother and daughter? Do you find the mother and
daughter familiar to you?

2. What is the cultural identity of the speaker and listener?

3. What is benna?

4, What is the importance of gender in the story? If the girl in Girl were
a boy, would the mother be telling him the same things?

5. If the father were talking instead of the mother, would he say
the same?

B. Group work: Make a list of foreign or unfamiliar objects
mentioned in the story and make short notes on them in small
groups. Present the notes in the class.

C. One is not born a woman, one becomes a woman. This is a
comment by a famous gender theorist. Does the story give you a
sense of that kind? Write ten sentences on your thoughts.

D. Biological attributes make a person act as a man or a
woman in society. This creates gender identity and gender
discrimination. In the following table, complete the list of
activities that you find marked in our society as mans job and
womans job:

Athletics Nursing এ
Scuba diving 5

Sense of Self 7

Lesson 3: O Me! O Life!

A. OMe! O Life!

Walt Whitman

Oh me! Oh life! of the questions of these recurring,

Of the endless trains of the faithless, of cities filld with the foolish,

Of myself forever reproaching myself, (for who more foolish than I, and who

more faithless?)

Of eyes that vainly crave the light, of the objects mean, of the struggle ever

renew d,

Of the poor results of all, of the plodding and sordid crowds I see around me,

Of the empty and useless years of the rest, with the rest me intertwined,

The question, O me! so sad, recurringWhat good amid these, O me, O life?

Answer.

That you are herethat life exists and identity,

That the powerful play goes on, and you may contribute a verse.

B. Listen to the poem using the following YouTube link:
https://www. youtube.com/watch?v=kGZo87If2T8

C. Answer the following questions:

1. What is the main theme of the poem?

11. What recurring questions does the poet mention?

111. What does the poet mean by useless years?

iv. Is age an identity marker? What are the attributes of old age?

v. What do sordid and plodding mean?

vi. What faith does the poet mention here?

vil. Is there a symbolic meaning of contribute a verse in the last
line?

vili.Do you find the answer section of the poem convincing?

D. Pair work: There are some words in the poem like filled
and renewd. These are called contractions. Make a list of
such words in pairs with the help of your subject teacher.

এ ৮ Write a summary of the poem and present it in the class.
S
AN

Unit Two
Climate Change
|.  7 অজ দল 7 টি r
x. a - a
1 ee * শর
~ i সু
= সপ: কোটি a ৬ ইল
যে... সস angen = .
iar 2 Te পর ০
- - সিন শাল্লা আলা
 পেশ ০ a শা, _ তার
ea oe জপ
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e demonstrate understanding and summarise texts
e ask and answer questions
e take part in debates on given topics
e take part in role playing and conversations
e draft and deliver lectures on given topics
e write letters to newspapers highlighting certain problems
e write slogans for posters.
Ks)
Ss
N

Climate Change 9
Lesson 1: The Greed of the Mighty Rivers
A. Read the following text and answer the questions.
Meherjan lives in a slum on the Sirajgonj Town Protection Embankment.
The whispering wind from the river Jamuna makes the fire unsteady. The dancing
flames remind Meherjan of the turmoil in her life.
Not long ago Meherjan ছা vo
had  everything oo! ie a 2)
family, arable land and 3 + a কি | এ.
cattle. The erosion of MY Mog a ao ৮. লা হর
the Jamuna gradually Rn এ ৯ রা
consumed all her land ছি vO #" | eis

- -   /
property. It finally [+ ae 5১ ~. পি  ১ টি >
claimed her only রি hs Le 2
shelter during the last monsoon. It took the river only a day to devour Meher's
house, trees, vegetable garden and the bamboo bush. She had a happy family
once. Over the years, she lost her husband and her family to diseases that cruel
hunger and poverty brought to the family. Now, she is the only one left to live on
with the loss and the pain. The greedy Jamuna has shattered her dreams and
happiness.
There are thousand others waiting to share the same fate like Meherjan.
Bangladesh is a land of rivers, some of whose banks overflow or erode during
monsoon. Erosion is a harsh reality for the people living along the river banks.
During each monsoon many more villages are threatened by the mighty rivers
like the Jamuna, the Padma and the Meghna. It is estimated that river erosion
makes at least 100,000 people homeless every year in Bangladesh. In fact, river
erosion is one of the main dangers caused by climate change. If we can't take
prompt actions to adapt to climate change, there will be thousands of more
Meherjans in our towns and villages every year.

10 English For Today
B. For each phrase below choose the meaning that is closest to the
meaning used in the text in A.
1. In paragraph 3 'mighty rivers mean
a. rivers that have huge volumes of water and very strong currents
b. rivers having many rowing boats in them
c. rivers that make people cry out
d. rivers that have strong banks
2. landed property
a. arented piece of land
b. a piece of land on the bank of a river
c. property in the form of a source of income to its owner
d. property used only as an agricultural farm
3. whispering wind
a. wind that blows from across the river
b. wind that blows with a hissing sound
c. wind that helps someone make a fire
d. wind that blows in summer
4. dancing flames
a. a traditional form of folk dance
b. flames that make people dance around them
c.flames that are made unstable by the blast of air
d. flames made by people to remember their past
C. Ask and answer the following questions in pairs.
a. What does Meherjan use to make fire for cooking her meals?
b. What property did Meherjan lose due to river erosion?
০. What do you know about Meherjans family?
d. In which season is river erosion most likely to occur?
9. Why is the phrase greedy Jamuna used to describe the river? ৩
What greed do you notice in the description? =

Climate Change 11
D. Complete the summary of Meherjans life with words/phrases from
the box.
Meherjan 15 a typical (1) ..................... woman who lives in a slum. She
lost her shelter and properties (2) ..................... the erosion of the river
Jamuna. She also lost her family. Her husband had died of diseases
caused by poverty and (3) .................. Now, she is only a (4) ..............
Like Meherjan there are many people who have become the (5) ............
of river erosion. River erosion is still posing (6) ..................... to the lives
and properties of thousands of people. People living (7) ..................... the
rivers are the most likely victims of river erosion. Each year about
(8) ........:.ssee20e22e. people become homeless due to river erosion in
Bangladesh. Meherjans life is just one (9) ..................... of how climate
change (10) ..................... the lives of thousands of people
victims affects close to slum dweller homeless
threats example due to shortage of food  one lakh
E. Debate: Form two groups of 3/4. Decide which group will speak
for/against the motion given below. In your group, first, discuss and
note down five/six points to support/oppose the motion. Then select
the speakers from each group to start the debate.
Motion: Humans cant do anything to control the course of nature.
Lesson 2: Environmental Pollution
A. Look at the pictures below and discuss the questions.
1. What do you see in each picture?
2. What are some of the common sources of environmental pollution?
২৩
S 3. Which of these sources are most threatening for your environment?

12 English For Today
25 তত তল
Picture 1 Picture 2
শষ রি I , নর
: ০৬৬: at Yo.
তি i | | i Tye কি -
o> UE
Picture 3 Picture 4
B. Now read the following passage to know more about environmental
pollution in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh is now in the grip of all sorts of pollution like air pollution, soil
pollution and water pollution. The dwellers of the urban areas are the worst
sufferers of such pollution. The indiscriminate industrialisation process in
Bangladesh over the past decades has created significant environmental
problems. We will now read about some of the most common types of
environmental pollutions and ways of coping with them.
Air Pollution
Air pollution comes from a wide variety of sources. In Bangladesh poisonous
exhausts from industrial plants, brick kilns, old or poorly-serviced vehicles and
dust from roads and construction sites are some of the major sources of air
pollution.
We can minimise this type of pollution by making less use of motor vehicles and
avoiding the use of vehicles older than 20 years. We may also use proper ৩
lubricants to lessen the level of emission and pollutants. We can encourage S

Climate Change 13
people to use Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) or Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG)
for fuelling their cars. The government may relocate hazardous industries like
brick kilns to areas away from human habitations.
Water Pollution
Water pollution can occur in oceans, rivers, lakes, ponds and underground
reservoirs. As different water sources flow together, the pollution can spread
easily and quickly. Causes of water pollution include:

ও increased sediment from soil

৬ erosion

ও improper waste disposal and littering

e leakage of soil pollution into water supplies

৬ organic materials that decay in water supplies
In fact, polluting the land means polluting the water. Throwing away a toxic
substance on the ground near a water source means it eventually reaches the
body of water. As a result, the water is polluted. Industrial wastes must not be
disposed in rivers or lakes. We need to be more careful about disposing
household wastes too. Use of pesticides means that when it rains, chemicals
used in the lawn or garden wash into the water bodies. Therefore, we must be
aware of the dangers of using pesticides as they may pollute our rivers, canals
and lakes.
Soil Pollution
Among the most significant causes of soil pollution is the enormous volume of
industrial waste which is being produced every day but not disposed properly.
The mismanagement of household wastes, particularly the polythene shopping
bags, has caused serious threat to the soil and the drainage system. Another
cause for soil pollution is the use of agricultural pesticides, fertilizers, etc.
Sometimes fuel leakages from automobiles may get washed away by rain and
seep into the nearby soil.
Pesticides and fertilizers are useful for plant growth but their overuse has led to
soil pollution. Natural fertilizers and compost can be used instead of their
chemical alternatives. Recycling is another way to reduce and control soil
pollution. Recycling papers, plastics and other materials reduces the volume of
refuse in landfills. Deforestation also causes erosion, pollution and the loss of

_ fertility in the topsoil. Planting trees and re-forestation help prevent soil erosion
Ss and pollution.

14 English For Today

C. From your reading of the text B complete each blank space in the table
with no more than two words and/or numbers.

e Toxic smokes from e Dont drive motorcars
১১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০01800 which are older than
e Vehicles which are old ২০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৭ YOars,
Air pollution and poorly ............ e Use car lubricants of good
e Smoke from the quality to keep the
veseeeeeee felds ১১১০০০০০০০০০০]6561 minimum.
e Use CNG or LP gas as car
e Industrial wastes not e Use compost for
১১১০০০০০০০০০০০১০ properly. agricultural purpose.
Soil pollution shopping bags plastics. and other
e Use of agricultural materials.
pesticides and , Plant more trees to help
ররর prevent loss of fertility in
the .......২০০০০০০০০০০০,

D. In groups of four, prepare a summary in 100 words of the topic
below. First, work together to prepare a draft. When the draft is
complete, select a group member to read it to the class.

Topic: Polluting the land means polluting the water
E. Look at the three posters below. What messages do they give? Which
one do you like the most? Tell your friend why you like it.
PLEASE DONT THROW THIS LAKE IS NOT FOR YON. ROMES, DOYOU?
TRAST EO nes FAMILY SWIMMING Your H YTRASH MINE}
এ রাশ ররর ১... el or Lo eee তত =e
এ 2501 cs =
LGN আনি bf ee, (017 Sy) 4
LOSE] | age আত :

Climate Change 15
Lesson 3: Human Being and Climate
A. Discuss the questions in pairs.
1. Can human being influence the climate? If the answer is yes, explain how?
2. Which human activities are responsible for increasing carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere?
3. How can trees help save our environment?
Now read the text below and find answers to the above questions.
Human being can neither change the sun's radiation nor the earth's orbit around the
sun. But they can control the increase in the amount of greenhouse gases and its
effect on the atmosphere. Only during the last hundred years the carbon dioxide
concentration has been raised alarmingly in the atmosphere and we humans can
be held responsible for this.
The main cause of the increase in carbon dioxide level in the atmosphere is the
burning of fossil fuels. Since the end of the 19" century, industrial activities
increased rapidly giving rise to many factories. These factories required energy,
which was produced through the combustion of coal. Besides coal, other sources
of energy such as mineral oil and natural gas were also burned to heat our
houses, run cars and airplanes or to produce electricity. Nowadays, about 85
million barrels of crude oil are burned daily. Every time a fossil raw material is
burned, it releases carbon dioxide into the air.
Therefore, it is clear that more and more greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide
are being generated worldwide by humans. Moreover, we are also strengthening
the greenhouse effect by deforestation, which means cutting down trees. Every
year enormous areas of forests are destroyed by people to obtain wood and to
clear regions for mining and to create pasture. This loss of the forest causes dual
problems. Trees that are burned up release large volumes of carbon dioxide gas
into the air. On the other hand, as forests absorb a lot of carbon dioxide from the
air and deliver oxygen instead, we also destroy an important storehouse of
carbon dioxide when we clear forests.
B. Read the statements below and say if they are True/False. If false, give
the correct information.
1. Fossil fuels are burned at an alarming rate due to industrialisation.
2. Coal is the only fuel used for generating energy.
৩ 3. At present, nearly 85 million barrels of crude oil are used weekly.
Q 4. Deforestation is caused by nature.
 5. Forests help consume carbon dioxide gases from the air.

16 English For Today
C. Match the meanings in column B and the words/phrases in column A.
Se ___ ____ 87
1 Suns radiation a. energy that is transmitted from the sun in the
form of rays or waves or particles
2 Fossil fuels b. the process used by plants to convert light
energy captured from the sun to chemical
energy
3 Combustion of coals | c. a basic material or substance used in the
production or manufacturing of goods
4 Crude oil d. non-renewable sources of energy that come
from the remains of plants and animals
5 Raw materials e. intentional destructions or removal of trees
and other vegetations for agricultural,
commercial, housing or firewood use
6 Deforestation f. a naturally occurring, unrefined petroleum
product that can be refined to produce usable
products such as diesel, gasoline, heating oil,
jet fuel, kerosene, etc.
7 Photosynthesis g. burning of coal usually in industrial plants.

D. Write a letter to the Editor of a newspaper expressing your concern
about growing deforestation in your area. Describe how deforestation
is changing your environment. Also suggest what actions could be
taken to stop cutting down trees. Follow the clues below.

e dangers caused by deforestation
e increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
e the greenhouse effect
e making people aware of the adverse effect of deforestation
e making an action plan to stop deforestation
Ss

Climate Change 17

E. 1001 at these posters below. They are made to make people aware
of the dangers of deforestation. In groups, design a poster to show
the dangers caused by deforestation. Then write a slogan for the poster.

aj - লু

ল colour a 

a simile  = পিসি ৃ oe Bt

pe ate ~ ও .

RED "শী Youre  por of (hs boo

Lesson 4: The Wheel of Cyclone

A Read the following excerpt from Amitabh Ghoshs The

Great Derangement and answer the questions.

On the afternoon of March 17, 1978, the weather took an odd turn in north Delhi.

Mid-march is usually a nice time of year in that part of India: the chill of winter

is gone and the blazing heat of summer is yet to come; the sky is clear and

monsoon is far away. But that day dark clouds appeared suddenly and there were

squalls of rain. Then followed an even bigger surprise: a hailstorm.

I was then studying for an MA at Delhi University while also working as a

part-time journalist. When the hailstorm broke, I was in a library. I had planned

to stay late, but the unseasonal weather led to a change of mind and I decided to

leave. I was on my way back to my room when, on an impulse, I changed

direction and dropped in on a friends. But the weather continued to worsen as we

were chatting, so after a few minutes, I decided to head straight back by a route

that I rarely had occasion to take.

I had just passed a busy intersection called Maurice Nagar when I heard a

rumbling sound somewhere above. Glancing over my shoulder I saw a gray,

tube-like extrusion forming on the underside of a dark cloud: it grew rapidly as

I watched, and then all of a sudden it turned and came whiplashing down to

earth, heading in my direction.

18 English For Today
Across the street lay a large administrative building. I sprinted over and headed
toward what seemed to be an entrance. But the glass-fronted doors were shut,
and a small crowd stood huddled outside, in the shelter of an overhang. There
was no room for me there so I ran around to the front of the building. Spotting a
small balcony, I jumped over the parapet and crouched on the floor.
The noise quickly rose to a frenzied pitch, and the wind began to tug fiercely at
my clothes. Stealing a glance over the parapet, I saw, to my astonishment, that
my surroundings had been darkened by a churning cloud or dust. In the dim
glow that was shining down from above, I saw an extraordinary panoply of
objects flying past-bicycles, scooters, lampposts, sheets of corrugated iron, even
entire teastalls. In that instant, gravity itself seemed to have been transformed
into a wheel spinning upon the fingertip of some unknown power.
I buried my head in my arms and lay still. Moments later the noise died down
and was replaced by an eerie silence. When at last I climbed out of the balcony,
I was confronted by a scene of devastation such as I had never before beheld.
Buses lay overturned, scooters sat perched on treetops, walls had been ripped out
of buildings, exposing interiors in which ceiling fans had been twisted into
tulip-like spirals. The place where I had first thought to take shelter, the
glass-fronted doorway had been reduced to a jumble of jagged debris. The panes
had shattered and many people had been wounded by the shards. I realised that
I too would have been among the injured had I remained there. I walked away in
a daze.
Long afterward, I am not sure exactly when or where I hunted down the Times
of Indias New Delhi edition of March 18, I still have the photocopies I made of it.
30 dead, says the banner headline, 700 Hurt As Cyclone Hits North Delhi.
(Abridged)
Answer the following questions from your understanding of the above text
1. What do you mean by the title The Great Derangement? What
reasons are there for our environment to be deranged?
2. Describe the weather of 17th March 1978 in your own words.
3. What job did the author do while studying in Delhi?
4. What steps did the author take to save himself when the cyclone hit
North Delhi?
5. Have you ever seen any natural calamity around you? Describe what S
you saw in your own words. ৭২

Climate Change 19

B. Match the following group of words in column A with the
meanings given in column and translate each words/group of
words into Bengali.
ee ee 77

a whip being cracked
in that instant to look quickly

C. 1. Find out published news about natural calamity in
Bangladesh and bring that paper cutting to class. Discuss in
groups of four classmates on how journalists report news of
disasters.

2. Write a news report describing a natural calamity in your
locality in 100 words.

D. Write a personal diary entry in 100 words, describing a day
in your life that did not go as you had planned. A Sample diary
entry is given below:

২৩
=

20 English For Today
30th September 2024
Dear Diary,
Today was one of the worst days of my life. I had started for school
right on time at 7.30am. Usually, my father gives me a ride to the
school on his bike. But today, he had to go earlier to his office and
asked me to take a rickshaw.
I knew that it would take a longer time to reach school on a rickshaw,
and so I had decided to leave earlier. As I stood in front of my house to
call a rickshawpuller, I found that all the rickshaws had already been
taken by school students and their guardians. I waited there for 10
minutes and found one vacant rickshaw and rode on it.
On my way, suddenly it began raining heavily and I was soaked from
head to toe. Just imagine! What a disaster the day was for me. I entered
my class drenched as a crow!
Will write to you tomorrow again. I have to sleep now so that I can be
up early for school tomorrow.
Goodnight :-)
Lesson 5: A Friend of the Earth )
এ. ক
A. Discuss the questions in pairs.  ay oa
1. Do you throw away empty cans and bottles?
2. What do you do with your old newspapers? .
3. What happens to the garbage after you throw it vee ue fe
away? a
B. _ Read the following text carefully to know about how we can save our
environment.
LETS SAVE OUR PLANET!
Everyone must play a part in protecting the environment. There are many
things you can do on your own every day to help save the planet. Here 816 50175 ৩
suggestions. Ss

Climate Change 21
REDUCE!
Really, the best thing we can do for the planet is to use its resources properly.
Our unplanned activities are mainly responsible for the environmental crisis. Here
are some questions you can ask yourself before buying something, "Do I really
need this?" or "Is there another product which would do the same thing but is
more sustainable?" Or ask the question, "Will this last a long time?" Some other
questions may be, "Do I know how this item was made, how it will be used and
how it will be disposed of?"
REUSE!
What do you think of using your own ceramic cup or mug at your school or local
club? It means there are no plastic cups to throw away. You can wash it and reuse
it every day. Unfortunately, we are encouraged to buy a new "improved" item
even if the one we have can be repaired or reused. When we buy things, we
should buy those that are durable; we should use them properly, and have them
repaired when necessary. If we practise this, many things will not only last a
life-time, but also be passed on for future use. However, if something is truly
unusable for its original purposes, try to be more creative and think of how else
it might be used. When you're done with it, think of whether someone else might
be able to use it. You can donate some of the things to the poor. You may also sell
some of your used items through personal advertisements in a local newspaper
or in social media.
RECYCLE!
Rather than throwing an item out when neither you nor anyone else can make
use of it, have it recycled. And if recycling is not possible, it is better to send
goods to a landfill or have them burned up. Find out what types of materials can
be recycled in your area. Clean and sort the materials before putting them out in
the bin. Recycling your drink and food cans means there will be less trash in a
resource recovery facility or landfill. Moreover, a company can use the old cans
to make new ones.
C. Now ask and answer these questions in pairs.

1. How can you cut down your shopping list?

2. What can you do to reuse things?

3. What kind of household goods, clothes and toys, can be donated?

শব 4. Howcan you sell your used items?
x 5. How recycling may help save our environment?

22 English For Today

D. Complete the blank spaces in the table below.

| Whatisit | Examples

To create less wastes, so Using a towel for drying hair

Reduce that there are fewer items that] instead of using an electric hair-
must be recycled or dryer.
১১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০ AWAY.

Reuse To buy things that can be Using your own ceramic cup at
used again and again, 01:10 | your school or club means there
find out another way of are nO ................ cups to
১১০০০০০০০০০০১০ them, throw away. You can

২১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ It and reuse it
every day.

Recycle Instead of throwing an item | Giving/selling used plastic bottles
in the garbage, to give itto a| to someone to make something
person or company who will | else from them.
vessessseeeeee. It, or make
something else with it.

E. To do this exercise, you will need information about recycling in your
local community. If you dont know, ask your teacher to help you
learn what you can recycle from your home. Then choose one item
from the box to talk about it following the model below.

A: What are you going to do with these old magazines?

B: I dont know what to do with these.

A: Why dont you reuse/recycle them?

B: How can I do that?

A: Its easy. Take them to a shop that buys old newspapers and magazines

for recycling.

Household items
glass bottles and jars, containers and toys,
aluminium foils or trays, aerosol cans, box ৩
boards, magazines and catalogues, old CDs Ss

Unit Three
Pastimes
@ 
&) ৬.
4 iy
Learning outcomes
After we have studied the unit, we will be able to
e narrate incidents and events in a logical sequence
ও participate in conversation, discussions and debates
e read maps, charts, graphs etc.
Q
aq

24 English For Today
Lesson 1: Have You Any Favourite Pastime?
A Look at the pictures. What are the persons doing here? When do they
do these kinds of activities?
. . z
RUZ hid \
1 ,
"ut
(7. ws | Be ৬
| an ef = 4 ate
B. 1২990 the conversation and answer the questions.
Tiya : Anusha, what's the matter? Youre wearing sports trousers, T-shirts,
sports shoes and carrying a bag! Where are you coming from?
And you look tired!
Anusha : Not exactly, Tiya. Im feeling great because Im just coming back
from the gym.
Tiya : Do you go to the gym regularly?
Anusha : Yes, I do. I go twice a week. Its one of my favourite pastimes.
Tiya : Really! Going to the gym is your favourite pastime! You make
me laugh!
Anusha : Why not? I like sports because I like to be fit. 'm not a lazy
person like you!
Tiya : What do you do there?
Anusha : I do yoga.
Tiya : Dont you have any other pastimes?
Anusha  : Hmm... yes, I have. I like playing chess, painting, and reading
books when Im free. I also like photography but Im yet to learn
it. What do you doin your pastime? ৩
N
S
AQ

Pastimes 25
Tiya : Ilike watching TV, listening to music, reading books and
magazines, and playing games on the computer. I do like
gardening. Butwe dont have sufficient space. So I do pot
planting. By the way,I dont know much about yoga. Would
you please tell me about it?
Anusha : Sure! 11] give you an article on it. It will help you know about yoga.
Okay?
Questions
1. Why does Anusha like going to the gym?
2. What are her pastimes?
3. Make a list of Tiyas pastimes.
4. How will Tiya learn about yoga?
C. Read the following texts. Then check (২) the statements below:
Yoga: Tap Into the Many Health Benefits
Understanding yoga
Yoga is a kind of posture and breathing exercise. It brings together physical and
mental disciplines to achieve peace of body and mind, helping you relax and
manage stress and anxiety. Traditional yoga puts emphasis on behavior, diet
and meditation. But if you're just looking for better stress managementand not
an entire lifestyle changeyoga can still help. Yoga trainers gradually choose
easier to complex activities for practitioners. However, all practitioners do not
necessarily need the same kinds of practice.
The health benefits of yoga
The potential health benefits of yoga are numerous and may include:
e Stress reduction
With its quiet, precise movements, yoga draws your focus away from
your busy and chaotic day towards calm as you move your body
through poses that require balance and concentration.

26 English For Today
e Increased fitness
As you learn and refine new poses, you may enjoy improved balance,
flexibility, range of motion and strength. And this means you're less
likely to injure yourself in other physical endeavours or in your daily
activities.
e Management of chronic health conditions
Yoga might help in a variety of health conditions, such as cancer,
depression, pain, anxiety and insomnia, fatigue and mood shifts. Yoga
can also help reduce heart rate and blood pressure.
 Weight loss
If you're overweight or have eating disorder, yoga may help you make
the healthy lifestyle changes necessary to gain control of your eating and
reduce weight.
While you shouldn't expect yoga to cure you or offer you 100 percent relief, it
can help some health conditions when combined with standard medical
treatment. And if you already enjoy good health, yoga can be an enjoyable
supplement to your regular fitness routine.
D. Work in pairs. Discuss these questions. Give your own opinions.
1. How does exercise work on our memory?
2. What other benefits can you think of from exercise?
3. What is the most important benefit of exercise to you and why?
E. Complete the sentences.
a. Yoga is a practice Of ......১১০০১০০০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০১০০০,
b. Traditional Yoga works through .....১১১১০০০০০১০০০০০০১০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০ ৭
c. Yoga is very effective 11] 11811951116. .....,১.,১,০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ ৭
d. Through the poses of balance and concentration Yoga ...................-
0, ..২০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০19৪16 in increased fitness.
f. Yoga can reduce or work for ,..১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০,
g Yogacan control ..........২----০০০০০০০০০০০০২০০০০০০০৭ S
h. Yoga cannot cure 100 percent, but .......০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ নব

Pastimes 27
F. Check (২) the statements about yoga below.
a. Yoga improves fitness. LJ b. Yoga has little to do with eating []
habits.
c. It may differ according to [-] d. Ithelps people shake off all types [_]
practitioners levels. of physical and mental disorders.
e. It works both on body and mind. [_] _ f. It helps practitioners undergo Oy
similar level of difficulty.
g. If you know yoga, you have better[_] 10. It also helps you live longer. [_]
control over your real life hazards.
G. 1২০90 the text.
Hi, I'm Styam. I'm from Magura. Although its the district headquarters, it's a
small town. I'm in grade 9 now in Chander Haat Bidyaloya. I love games and
sports very much. My father was an athlete in his student life. He inspires me to
follow in his footsteps and take part in games and sports or do some exercise
besides my studies. So I get up early in the morning and take a walk with my
father almost every day. We walk for about an hour. At school, during break I
play kabadi, gollachhut, badminton, table tennis, and carom. Sometimes I prac-
tise the high jump and the long jump outside the school campus. Playing football
is a passion for me. I like watching television too.
I watch sports programmes on different TV channels during my free time. I'm a
fan of National Geographic, Discovery, and Animal Planet for their
documentaries as they are quite interesting as well as educative. Recently my
father has presented me with a camera as he was very happy with the result of
my Junior School Certificate exam. When I hold the camera, I feel so excited! I
wish I could be an amateur photographer in future - not to take only personal
photographs at different parties but to shoot our beautiful Bangladesh. I'm sure
that soon photography will be my most favourite pastime.
২৩
S
N

28 English For Today
H. Work in pairs. Read the statements of the following grid. First
match the parts in Column B with Column C to make complete
sentences. Then make questions for the statements in Column A.
What ------------------------- | 1.Despite the fact  that}a. besides his studies.
Magura 1s ৪ district
headquarters,
When ------------------------- | 2.His father was a |b.itis a small town.
sportsman
How -------------------------- | 3. He encourages Shyam to |c. in his student life.
participate in games and sports
When ------------------------- | 4. Shyam enjoys  playing|d. during break at
different games and sports | school.
Who -------------------------- | 5. He walks e.on different TV
channels.
How long -------------------- | 6. They walk f. with his father.
Why --------------------------- | 7. He prefers programmes |g. for their educative
on nature and life values.
What -------------------------- | 8. He watches sports h. for about an hour.
programmes
I. Write about your own pastime following the model in G.
২
নে
=

Pastimes 29

Lesson 2: Reading Really Helps!

A. 7২990 the conversation and tell what Anusha is going to read.

Anusha : Tiya, hope you enjoyed the article on yoga.

Tiya : Yes, its great. By the way, Anusha, how did you enjoy
London Olympics as a sports lover?

Anusha : People rightly say that it is the greatest show on earth. Im still
thrilled to remember what Michael Phelps and Usain Bolt
have shown. Amazing!

Tiya : Right you are. They are incredible. However, Ive got an
interesting article on the Internet on Michael Phelps and Usain
Bolt. You might like it and take part in the debate on who
is better between these two greats. Please read it.

Anusha : Ahh... Michael Phelps and Usain Bolt! Thank you Tiya! I would
love to read it.

B. Read the text published in a newspaper in 2012, and answer the

questions that follow.

Michael Phelps, Usain Bolt are great, but who's better?

With the curtains closing on the 2012 London Olympics, it's impossible not

to look back and reflect on the greatest performances by Olympic athletes.

7 & fF,
৬ Ou ty 3 | | মি
, এ শপ 1 .
[Photo: Kirby Lee, USA TODAY Sports]
aS
S
AQ

30 English For Today
The Olympics have many memorable moments and athletes we'll remember by
name alone. The list is quite big. Michael Phelps and Usain Bolt are the latest
addition to this list of the bests. They made London Olympics stand apart. If
there is any question like this: "What is the standout performance of London
2012?" perhaps the answer is "The London Games gave us Michael Phelps vs.
Usain Bolt." The first one is an already decorated Olympian, who put the
finishing touches on his great athletic careers. And another came up with a new
definition of fast. Two of the most popular Olympic sports, sprinting and
swimming, saw their two biggest stars captivating audiences. They'd also domi-
nated the 2008 Beijing Games, but Phelps and Bolt cemented their legacies in
London. Phelps, the American swimmer, passed gymnast Larissa Latynia for the
most Olympic medals ever. Bolt was the third man to repeat as a 100-meter gold
medalist and the first as a 200-meter gold medalist, and he broke his own Olym-
pic record by running the 100 meter in 9.63 seconds. Once Phelps and Bolt were
back in their pool and track, the story lines changed.
Phelps is the most-decorated Olympian ever, with 22 overall medals: 18 gold,
2 silver, 2 bronze. Bolt is the most accomplished Olympic sprinter with the
unprecedented double, making clear that he's the fastest man in the world.
But there's a debate: Who had the better Olympics? It'd be tough to top Phelps'
eight gold medals in Beijing, but what if we're only talking London?
London was Phelps' grand finale. He won four golds and two silvers in seven
events, and he says he'll never race again.
London was Bolt's chance to prove he's still the greatest. Bolt won six gold
medals in six Olympic finals. He is the first man ever in the history of the modern
Games to sweep the 100 and 200 in back-to-back Olympics. Not to mention the
addition of back-to-back relay golds.
And Bolt became a legend, in his own words. Phelps already was. Bolt is just 25
years old, so there is no telling how long he can be on top of the sprinting world.
What if he decides to "retire" from sprinting to focus on the 400 meters, just to
break another world record or two? It would be amazing and entirely possible
for him to accomplish.
Who had the better 2012 Games? You tell us, let the debate begin.
[Adapted from USA Today, Sports, London 2012] ৩
Q
S
N

Pastimes 31
Questions
1. What makes London Olympic 2012 exceptionally sensational?
2. How are Phelps and Bolt brilliantly similar and different?
3. Between these two Olympians who has bagged the highest honour within
the same time frame?
4. What is special in Bolt so far?
5. How does Bolt evaluate himself ?
C. Make two flow charts on Michael Phelps and Usain Bolt. The first
two are done for you.
Michael Phelps
the
greatest
>
swimmer 8 8
ever
Usain Bolt
the most
___ ৯ > ___৯
successful
D. _ Read the following text and complete the blank spaces with the appropriate
words from the box below.
answer sprinter Olympians speed Olympics swimmer
debate legends retired prove histories biggest
These are the stories of two most successful Olympians of history. While
one is famous as the fastest .........., the other is celebrated as the fastest
...... Of the world. However, both are unparalleled for their ........... in their
own field. They made history in the Beijing .......... They have made newer
১১০০০০০০০০১] the London Olympics too. They are the living .............. now.
Though Phelps has .......... from his race, Bolt has prospects to ........ himself
০ inthe next Olympic as well. After the .......... show on earth is over in London,
= this .......... will go on who is better. Only time will ............ this question.

32 English For Today
E. Work in pairs. Decide who is better between these two champions.
Give reasons in favour of your decisions.

Lesson 3: Change in Pastime

A. Read the text.

Childhood outdoor pastimes 'in decline'

Traditional childhood pastimes of climbing trees and playing conkers are in

decline, according to a survey by the RSPB (Royal Society for the Protection

of Birds). Its a charitable organisation registered in England and Wales.

The survey shows that people under 34 recall far fewer such childhood

outdoor experiences than people over 55, according to a survey by RSPB.

People were asked which of the twelve childhood outdoor experiences they

could remember. The answer included making dens, daisy chains, climbing

trees, playing conkers and feeding birds. Four out of five boys climbed trees

and the same number of girls made daisy chains. But the survey showed the

numbers declining among the newer generations. 7~_ "7 75

Some 15% more of those aged over 55 had these |

outdoor experiences in their childhood,}., ee  we

compared with those between 15-34 years 010. ৯১ ১ no wee

Some 92% of the public agreed that experiences ie (১০ পিসি সা).

of nature were still important to children, and a's a ২ yh BE ar

82% agreed that schools should play a role in | ye a PN a

providing them to all children. র্ ASS 1১01 2

The survey has highlighted the positive impact of মা it Se রি এ

contact with nature on a child's education, 110211, হউন al

wellbeing and social skills. At the same time, there has been a decline in these

opportunities, with negative consequences for children, families and societya

condition now known as nature deficit disorder.

Mike Clarke, chief executive of the RSPB, will meet parliament members to

urge the government to join other organisations in providing children with first-

hand experiences of the natural environment... ."We believe this guidance

should include the many positive impacts to children of having contact with

nature and learning outside the classroom."

[Adapted from BBC news 6 September 2010] cS

S
বে

Pastimes 33

B. Read the following words and write their meanings as you understand
them from the context. If you dont understand, check the words
from a dictionary.
0 os ce
06109 ............-২-০০-০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০২০০০০০০০০৪০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০,
06০11116 ........২১০২০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০,
11110800 .....১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০,
CONSEQUENCE ........,১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৭
01501001 .......১.০২১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০,
0160 ....--.--০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০-০০৮০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৭০০২০০০৪০০০৩০০০০০০০০০০০০৭

C. Read the following statement taken from the text in A and say
what the subject of comparison is. Find out the other comparison in
text A.

People under 34 recall fewer such childhood outdoor experiences than

people over 55, according to the survey by Ipsos Mori for RSPB.

D. Do you agree that if children have more contacts with nature, they
may have a positive impact on them? Make a list of the benefits
or harms they may have if taken to nature frequently.

E. Speak to the senior citizens in your home or community. Ask them
about their pastime activities and take notes on them. Then write a
paragraph in the style of the text given in Section A to show the
differences. Also mention why these differences have taken place.

34 English For Today
Lesson 4: Change in Pastimes in Bangladesh
A. Tiya and Anusha decided to make a survey on_ students pastimes
in their class. After the survey they presented their findings in a
chart. Look at the chart and read how they explain their findings.
| Items For classes 9-10 | For classes 5-6
| Playing games and sports 22.3% 9.2%
| Watching television 17.2% 31.2%
| Chatting with friends | 13.7% 6.7%
| Reading books or 12.9% 11.7%
| magazines |
Gardening 10.7% 6.1%
| Attending social programs such 9.1% 7.8%
| as music, recitations or debates |
| Playing games on computers 8.2% 20.9%
Others 5.9% 6.4%
Tiya: Hello everyone! My name is Tiya. My friend, Anusha and I are going to do
a presentation on Pastime Habits of Classes 9 and 10 students in our school.
There are 120 students, 60 in class 9 and 60 in class 10. The classes have gender
equity. Each class has 30 male and 30 female students. The survey shows that
22.3 percent of students in classes 9-10 like games and sports as their most
favourite pastime, which is the 4" option given by classes 5-6 students.
Watching television is the second choice (17.2%) by the first group in contrast to
31.2% of the second group. It is noteworthy that watching television is the first
choice of the second group. A considerable number (13.7%) of 9-10 students
like to chat with their friends and thus it becomes the third popular choice in the
chart while this becomes one of the less important choices by the younger kids.
Only 6.7% of the kids take it as their first priority. It's interesting that both the
groups like reading books. 12.9% of students of classes 9-10 take it as their
favourite pastime. The number is 11.7% for Classes 5-6 students. Besides, &
gardening is voted (10.7% of students) to be the 5" preference by the grown up নি

Pastimes 35
group though it is not that much liked by the younger group. Only 6.1% of the
young kids are involved in it. This is interesting that though the higher number
of students in classes 9-10 prefer attending social programs (9.1%) than
students of classes 5-6 (7.8%), yet as a choice it 1s preferred by the latter group.
It is the 5" choice for them while to the older group it is the 6". Young kids
have greater fascination for playing games on the computers (20.9% like it as
their first choice). The chart shows that as the kids grow up, they lose their
passion for computer games. According to the chart the ratio declines to 8.2%
from 20.9% when the kids are students of classes 9-10. Finally, it can be said that
the influence of television has impact on both the groups but the more students
grow up, the more they opt for fields/ gym.
Questions
1. What are the gender policy of the surveyors?
2. What are the survey findings regarding watching television?
3. Which age group is more interested in socializing with others?
4. According to the chart, how do the kids change their pastimes when they
are grown up? What changes does the chart for 9-10 reflect ?
B. Work in groups. Make a chart on the pastimes of the students in your
class and present it to your class.
Lesson 5: Pastimes Vary
A. Read the conversation. What is it about? Do you agree or disagree?
Tiya : Anusha, I really wonder how pastimes vary from generation
to generation.
Anusha : Oh yes. I can tell you how.
Tiya : Although I dont know exactly, I think time is a big factor.
Anusha : You are right. Time changes many things. It changes our tastes
and abilities. Technology has roles too. Look, there was a time
when playing in the fields was very popular because we had many
open fields around. Going toa neighbours houses and hanging out
in groups were popular pastimes as well. You won't see these
activities now. The process of urbanization, the aggression of
satellite television and people's dependence on technology have
changed our lifestyle. Now boys and girls of urban and semi-urban
S areas are more dependent on the computer for social networking,
 video games, or computer assisted programmes.

36 English For Today

Tiya : Right. But how do you know all these things, Anusha?

Anusha : Oh....J read an interesting article on peoples changing
pastimes. It analyses the issue through a graph. Here it 1s. Read,
and Im sure you will enjoy it.

B. Read the article. Underline the words/expressions used in the article
to show the changes in the data. The first one is done for you in the
text.

Young people's changing attitude to pastimes
aValching Ty Cams and spotts sOnline/computer assisted programmes
ney We. 52%
aan 36
28 এত
্ i
1340 2090 2010

There is change in people's preferences for pastimes. A recent survey shows that

during the last twenty years, teenagers have gone through significant changes in

choosing their pastimes. The survey results are presented through a graph which
shows that there is a steady rise in young people's tendency to watch TV. In

1990, 41% of teenagers liked watching TV which increased to 48% in the next

ten years and it further increased to 52% in the next decade. Unfortunately, the

picture is grim in terms of young people's attraction to field games and sports.

While 50% of youngsters opted for games and sports in the 1990s, the figure was

12% less after a decade at 38%. Unfortunately the falling tendency persisted

through the next ten years and by 2010 it came down to 25%. Though the young

people have dissociated themselves noticeably from games and sports, there is a

sharp and steady rise in their association with online or computer assisted

programmes. In 1990 when the users of online or computer for pastimes were
only 9%, in 2000 the number nearly doubled and reached 14%, and with a rapid

increase in the next ten years it shot up to 23%. a

=

Pastimes 37
The survey also explains the reasons for this change. It says that television has
become a part of everyday life even to the underprivileged section of society.
This has resulted in larger number of young people opting for watching
TV as one of the most favourite pastimes. The increasing urbanization has
reduced the number of open fields. Therefore, there is a fallin selecting games
and sports as favourite pastimes, though it's not a good news for the country.
And the reason for selecting the computer assisted or online programmes
is that computer technology is getting cheaper, easier and more popular
every day. Indeed, our young generations are stepping into the e-world.
C. Now work in groups and analyse the following graph.
Elderly peoples changing attitude to pastimes in a community
 49%
১০০ 34% APE 30% পি আআ Watching TV
17% আআ Drawing room
11% ;
ao % Pa আআ Others
1990 2000 2010
Xo
S
AQ

Unit Four
Events and Festivals
2:০1 MAL ?
চারার... ria re a eae] r মর এ
সি at  a, ae 4 , হয়ে
চর 1০১০
| চর ০৪০০ / রত Mother's 1 রি
Ny দা
হ এ 7 রন রি RT ee ,
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e talk about events and festivals
 ask and answer questions and give opinions in a logical sequence
e infer meanings from the context.
২৩
Ss
NX

Events and Festivals 39
Lesson 1: Mothers Day
A. Look at the picture and discuss the questions. _ mt
1. What do you think the woman is tothe = shares wind 1
child? a os .
2. Why is she holding the child on her flank? | A. |
3. Cana mother be compared to anybody? | ; oo. os |
She can be compared with no other; | } ) রি - Moe রী.
This lovely lady is none but my mother. , রর me ৮ +. ,
B. Listen to the audio and answer the questions that follow. ;
C. Choose the correct answer.
1. According to ancient Greek myths Rhea is the
a. mother of gods. b. goddess of love.
c. goddess of wealth. d. goddess of health.
2. The name of Jesus Christs mother was
a. Rhea. b. Mary.
c. Anna. d. Anna Junior.
3. Julia Ward Howe was
a. Dutch. b. English.
c. Australian. d. American.
4. Mother's Day was first announced as a formal holiday in the USA in
a. 1872. b. 1905.
c. 1910. d. 1914.
5. In 1914 the American president was
a. Roosevelt. b. Ford.
c. Nixon. 0. Wilson.
6. Which country doesnt celebrate Mothers Day on the 2 Sunday of
May?
৩ a. Denmark b. The UK
Ss c. Italy d. Turkey

40 English For Today
D. Listen to the text again and answer these questions.

]. What country first observed Mothers Day as a national holiday?

2. When is Mothers Day now celebrated by most of the countries in

the world?

3. How is Mother's Day usually observed?

4. Why should we observe Mother's Day?
E. Write a paragraph by answering each of the following questions.

1. Do you help your mother with her housework? How?

2. Do you celebrate Mothers Day? If yes, when and how?
Lesson 2 : May Day 4 4g
A. Look at the picture and talk about it. নি

1. What do you see in the picture?  a ff:

2. Can you relate any historical event to this NA AY

picture? What happened on this day? A A

B. 1২০90 the text and answer the questions that follow. Y
May Day or International Workers Day is observed on May 1 all over the world
today to commemorate the historical struggle and sacrifices of the working
people to establish an eight-hour workday. It is a public holiday in almost all the
countries of the world.
Since the Industrial Revolution in the 18" and 19" centuries in Europe and
the US, the workers in mills and factories had been working a long shift,
fourteen or even more hours a day.
On May 1* in 1886, inspired by the trade unions), half of the workers
at the McCormick Harvesting Machine Company in Chicago went on strike
demanding an eight-hour workday. Two days later, a workers rally was held
near the McCormick Harvester Machine Company and about 6000 workers
joined it. The rally was addressed by the labour leaders. They urged the workers
to stand together, to go on with their struggle and not to give in to their bosses.
At one point of the rally, some strike breakers started leaving the meeting place.
The strikers went down the street to bring them back. Suddenly about 200
policemen attacked them with clubs and revolvers. One striker was killed
instantly, five or six others were seriously wounded and many others were এ
injured. =

Events and Festivals 41
The events of May 1, 1886 are a reminder that workers will continue to be
exploited until they stand up and speak out to gain better working conditions,
better pay and better lives.
Notes
1. Industrial Revolution: the period, especially in the 18" and 19" centuries Europe,
when machines were invented and first factories were established.
2. Trade Union: an organisation that represents workers of mills and factories.
Questions
1. What does May Day refer to?
2. How long did the workers have to work in a day before the May | strike?
3. Why did the workers in Chicago go on a strike?
4, What do you learn from the events of May 1, 1886?
C. Fill in the blanks with the verbs given in the box. Put them into their
correct forms.
add arrive begin do hear live
send support tread work
Tania is a poor garment worker. She in a big garment factory in Gazipur.
She in a slum with a few fellow workers. She works eight hours a day
onamonthly salary of Tk. 3000/-. She does overtime to some more
money to her income. If she can save something, she it to her father to
the family.
One day Tania was busy her work in the factory. Suddenly she
_ someone shouting Fire! Fire! The workers were panic-stricken
and everyone to rush to the stairs. There were not enough staircases
in the factory building. So some workers were under the foot and
others were injured in some other ways. However, the fire brigade
there in minutes and nothing serious happened.

42 English For Today
D. Now read the completed passage in C silently and answer the following
questions.
1. Do you think Tanias monthly salary is enough for her work?
2. Is the factory safe enough for workers? Why do you think so?
3. Do you have any suggestions for safety of factory workers? If so,
what?
Lesson 3 : International Mother Language Day - 1
A. Look at the picture and talk about it.
1. Whats the picture about? ৮ এ
2. Whats the place in the picture? i a
3. Why was it built? | i Gs র
B. Read the text. mt [1] []
21 February is a memorable day in our | toe
national history. We observe the day every af, Be ne oi wr
year as International Mother Language Day. ee Sk ame
The day is a national holiday. : ~
On this day, we pay tribute to the martyrs who laid down their lives to
establish Bangla as a state language in undivided Pakistan in 1952. The
struggle to achieve our language rights is known as the Language Movement.
The seed of the Language Movement was sown on 21 March 1948 when
Mohammad Ali Jinnah, the Governor General of Pakistan, declared in a public
meeting in Dhaka that Urdu would be the only state language of Pakistan.
The declaration raised a storm of protest all over the country. The protest
continued non-stop, gathering momentum day by day. It turned into a movement
and reached its climax in 1952. The government outlawed all sorts of public
meetings and rallies to stop it.
The students of Dhaka University defied the law and brought out a peaceful
protest procession on 21 February 1952. When the procession reached near
Dhaka Medical College, the police opened fire on the students, killing Salam,
Rafig, Barkat, Safiur and Jabbar. As a result, there were mass protests all over
the country and the government had to declare Bangla as a state language. This
kindled the sparks of independence movement of Bangladesh. S
nN

Events and Festivals 43
C. Complete the chart.
What happened
1948 |
D. Match the words with their meanings.
the ability to keep increasing or developing
E. Answer these questions.
1. Why do we observe 21 February as the International Mother
Language Day?
2. What happened when Urdu was declared as the only state language
of Pakistan?
3. The seed of independence was sown on 21 February 1952. Do you
agree? Why?
Lesson 4 : International Mother Language Day - 2
A. Discuss these questions.
1. When did the International Mother Language Day celebration begin?
৩ 2. What does the abbreviation UNESCO stand for?
S 3. What is the other name of 21 February?

44 English For Today
B. Read more about International Mother Language Day.
21 February is observed as Shaheed Dibosh every year throughout the country
in remembrance of the martyrs of language movement of 1952. The comme-
moration begins at the early hours of the day with mourning songs that recall the
supreme sacrifices of our language martyrs. People wear black badges and go to
the Shaheed Minar in barefoot processions, singing mourning songs. They
place wreaths at the Minar. Many of them visit the graves of the martyrs at
Azimpur graveyard and pray for them. They also attend various programmes
organised in remembrance of the language martyrs.
The UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation) on 17 November in 1999 proclaimed February 21 as the
International Mother Language Day in recognition of the sacrifices of the
martyrs for the rightful place of Bangla. Two Bangladeshi expatriates living in
Vancouver in Canada, Rafiqul Islam and Abdus Salam, sent a proposal to Kofi
Anan, the then Secretary General of United Nations. They requested him to
declare 21st February as the International Mother Language Day. They added
that the decision will honour and save all extinct languages of the world. As per
their logical expectations the goverment of bangladesh then took prompt initiative
by sending formal proposal to UNESCO. Finally, on 17 November 1999,
UNESCO declared 21st February as the International Mother Language Day.
The day is now annually observed worldwide to promote awareness of linguistic
and cultural diversity and multilingualism.
C. Match the words/phrases in the table with their meanings.

wreath  encourage

inremembrance of |e in appreciation of

proclaim e practice of using several languages

promote e an arrangement of flowers in the shape of a circle

diversity e declare

multilingualism  in memory of

in recognition of .

e variety
D. Read the text in B again and answer these questions.
২
]. Why is 21 February called Shaheed Dibosh? Ss

Events and Festivals 45
2. Why do people go to the Shaheed Minar? How do they go there?
3. Why is 21 February now observed throughout the world every
year?
E. Complete the passage with suitable words.
On 21 February 1952 was shed ata place between Dhaka
Medical College and Dhaka University to establish Bangla as
a state ______ of Pakistan.
All subsequent movements struggles for independence had their
origin in the historic language . Shaheed Minar is the
of the supreme sacrifice the mother tongue.
F. Write briefly how you observed this years 21 February at your school.
Lesson 5 : Independence Day
A. Look at the picture and ask and বৃ |
answer the questions about it. -
1. What do you see in the picture? og be .
2. Where is it? oon 1
3. Why was it built? me it |
B. Read the text. J y/ ] শব
one of the most important state festivals. The উল
day is celebrated every year in the country with great enthusiasm and fervour.
It is a national holiday. All offices, educational institutions, shops and factories
remain closed on this day. The day begins with a 31 gun salute.
Early in the morning the President and the Prime Minister, on behalf of the nation,
place floral wreaths at the National Mausoleum at Savar. Then other leaders,
political parties, diplomats, social and cultural organisations, educational institutions
and freedom fighters pay homage to the martyrs. People from all walks of life
also go there in rallies and processions. There are many cultural programmes
throughout the day, highlighting the heroic struggle and sacrifice in 1971.
In the National Stadium, school children, scouts and girl guides take part in
various displays to entertain thousands of spectators. Educational institutions
ও also organise their individual programmes. Sports meets and tournaments are
SN also organised on the day, including the exciting boat race in the river
Buriganga.

46 English For Today
In the evening, all major public buildings are illuminated with colourful lights.
Bangla Academy, Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy and other socio-cultural
organisations hold cultural functions. Similar functions are also arranged in
other places in the country.

C. Match the words with their meanings.
fervour e _acts of performing skills
alike ৬. to light up
spectator e inasimilar way
displays e  astrong feeling of excitement
illuminate |e aperson who is watching an event
D. Choose the best answer.
1. Our one of the most important state festivals is
a. Victory Day. b. Shaheed Dibosh.
c. Pahela Boishakh. d. Independence Day.
2. The celebration of Independence Day begins with
a. processions.
b. gun salute.
c. placing wreaths at the National Mausoleum.
d. parade by defence forces.
3. The National Mausoleum is
a. on Dhaka University campus. 0. at Ramna Park.
c. at Savar. d. near Dhaka Medical College.
4. On Independence Day various displays are held
a. atthe National Parade Ground. b. in the streets.
c. inthe decorated vehicles. d. the National Stadium.
E. Write in brief, how you have celebrated this years Independence Day
at your school.
২
N
S

Events and Festivals 47
Lesson 6: Pahela Boishakh
A. Look at the picture. Then ask and answer the questions about it.
 Fi 71 we Fea : ' . l ৮ a ৮ 7
. .  a 1 re SE | 4%
i rs শা.  স্ রর নী le, | : oo 9 রী রা
৬৬:1১:8৮
 এরি রানির ররর eof ডু কা
ra দ্র আন পা |
a 8
পদ লা ২ নিন শে তন | +.
চু গা রী সি 4 Ay rt : "
at নর he a . খু পুর - .
সপ: " টির নু
]. Whats the picture about?
2. Where do you think the picture was taken?
3. What are the people doing?
B. Read the text and complete the tasks C and D.
Pahela Boishakh' is the first day of Bangla new year. The day is a public holiday.
This day has a special significance for us as it is a part of Bangalee culture and
tradition. People from all walks of life, irrespective of their ethnic identity or
religious beliefs, celebrate the day with traditional festivities. On this day, the
whole of Bangladesh is in a festive mood. The day inspires people to start life
with renewed hopes aspirations.
S
q

48 English For Today
Every year the day is celebrated traditionally. People wake up early in the
morning, have a bath and wear traditional clothes. Women wear white sarees
with red borders and adorn themselves with colourful churis and flowers, while
men dress themselves in pajamas and punjabis. It is a day when people love
eating traditional food.
One of the most colourful events of the day is held in Dhaka. Early in the
morning, people in hundreds and thousands pour in from all directions to attend
the cultural function at Ramna Batamul organised by Chhayanaut. The cultural
programme begins just at sunrise and the renowned artists of the country take
part in the programme that starts with the famous Tagore-song
Esho-he-Boishakh, Esho Esho .....Artists also sing traditional folk songs, and
perform classical dances to the rhythm of musical instruments.
People also come to join the colourful processions, the biggest carnival of the
country, organised by the Fine Arts students of Dhaka University. The
procession usually displays the traditional practices of Bangalee culture. The
masks and wreaths worn by the people are so fascinating! Often they symbolise
contemporary worries or happiness in the national life. It attracts an increasing
number of foreign tourists every year.
The day is also observed all over the country. Different social and cultural
organisations and educational institutions celebrate the day with their own
cultural programmes.
On this day, newspapers bring out special supplements. There are also special
programmes on the radio and television.
The celebration of Pahela Boishakh marks a day of cultural unity for the whole
nation.
C. Ask and answer these questions in pairs.
1. Do you go out in the morning of Pahela Boishakh? If you do,
where do you go? If not, what do you do?
2. What kind of food do you eat in the morning of Pahela Boishakh?
3. Do you wear any special clothes on this occasion?
২১
S
AN

Events and Festivals 49

D. Complete the passage with suitable words.

The word Pahela means the first and Boishakh is the month of

Bangla calendar. The day is observed not in Bangladesh but in

some other parts of the world. It is celebrated in West Bengal, Assam and

Tripura. It is also in Australia and the UK. In Australia, the largest

for Bangla new year is the Sydney Boishakhi Mela held

Sydney Olympic Park. In England, the Bangalees celebrate the

day with a street in London. It is the ______ Asian festival in

Europe, Bangladesh and West Bengal.

E. Describe your own cultural or religious festival that you celebrate.
You can use the following words. You can also use other words
relevant to the festival.
colourful special traditional religious dance
cultural flowers food songs festive

Unit Five
Problems Around Us
এ
2০০০৫ হা
ane ea Oe ২
 oh, - * শর লালা a
টব AR সি a a St
a এ ৯০ * va
ea . শ de  এজ . .
cay নু
Learning outcomes
After we have studied the unit, we will be able to
e ask and tell about problems
e seek and give suggestions
e listen for specific information
e narrate something in writing
e read charts and do a project work.
S
নব

Problems Around Us 51
Lesson 1: The Ferry Boat
A. Look at the picture and answer these questions.
+ রা
উর চি OM ead
্ দিই - - 7 , If:
j শু, Ts দুল ঠা রা   b
I | পা শি ১৭ ted 4 রি ry
1. Where can you find this kind of boat?
2. Why does the boatman carry passengers across a river?
3. Why do people use country boats?
B. 13০90 the text and answer the following questions.
Ts there anybody here who has ever crossed a river by a country boat?
I have, teacher, said Jamil. And I clearly remember what happened
in that journey.
Would you please tell us what happened? the teacher asked.
"Okay, teacher. It happened when I was in class 6. On a weekly bazar day, people
were coming back with their shopping bags and baskets in hands, on shoulders
and heads. They had to cross the river. It was not a big river. There was a ferry
boat plying on the river. The boat could cross it in 8-10 minutes. It was just after
sunset. The weather was getting bad. The wind started blowing from the
S north-west. Black clouds were moving fast in the sky.
বে

52 English For Today
Everybody was trying to get into the boat. No more, no more, please wait,
shouted the boatman. But nobody listened to him.
What happened then, Jamil? asked Rumi.
With too many people on board, the boat sank in the middle of the river,
replied Jamil.
"Oh no! What happened then?" asked the teacher. "There were no casualties by
the grace of the Almighty. All the passengers swam to the other side. But some
of them lost the stuff they were carrying such as oil, salt and milk," said Jamil.
"Were you on the boat?" asked the teacher. "No, teacher. Seeing the boat over-
crowded, I waited for the next boat, replied Jamil.
"You did the right thing, Jamil."
Questions
Tick the best answer.
1. A ferry boat was plying on the river.
Here plying means
a. playing with other boats.
b. sinking in the river.
0. travelling along a route.
d. waiting for passengers.
2. Why was everybody trying to get into the boat?
Because
a. it was a weekly bazar day.
b. after sunset no ferry would ply on the river.
C. everybody had shopping bags with them.
d. it was going to be a dark and stormy evening.
3. The boatman requested the people to wait, because
a. his boat was very small.
b. the boat had already too many people.
০. there were other boats they could take.
d. he would not ferry people with bags and baskets. S
=

Problems Around Us 53
4. With too many people on board , the boat sank ...
Here the phrase on board means
a. on the boat.
b. on the wooden board.
0. outside the boat.
d. on the notice board.
5. There were no casualties.
The statement tells us that
a. nobody died.
b. nobody was rescued.
০. nobody accepted their fate.
d. nobody lost anything.
6. The boat was overcrowded.
Here overcrowded means
a. people were quarrelling on the boat.
b. the boat was unable to carry any more people.
০. the boatman did not like a crowd.
d. people were sitting on the boats bamboo hood.
C. _ Discuss in groups and write answers to these questions.
1. Why did some people have little or no patience when the ferry
boat was in danger of sinking?
2. "No more, No more, please wait' who said this? Explain in 2/3
sentences.
3. Answer the questions below:
a. If we have too many passengers at a bus or train station, what may
happen?
b. If we have too many people in a village / town/ city, what will
happen?
২১
=

54 English For Today
Lesson 2: Are We Too Many?
A. Read the text and do the following project work.
The next day when the teacher came to the class and was about to start the
lesson, Shanti Barua stood up and said, Teacher, can I ask you a question,
please?
Go ahead, Shanti, said the teacher.
"In our last class, we heard Jamil's story of how too many people made the ferry
boat sink. I have also seen crowds of people at bus stand, railway station,
launch and steamer ghats. It is not uncommon to see people travelling on top of
a bus or train and meeting with tragic accidents. My question is: Are there really
too many people in our country?"
Thank you, Shanti. Please sit down.
The teacher then looked round the class and asked,How many of you have the
same question in mind?
Almost all the hands went up.
"Okay," the teacher continued. "Finding the right answer to this question is very
important for usfor our national development. So,we will look at this issue with
some facts so that we can find out if we are really too many or not."
Project work: Discuss in groups and carry out a survey on the topic: "Too many
people" You can do the following things:

e Select only one small area such as your village or locality in the

town / city where you live.
e Find out its area. (You can do it by walking around it. At normal
speed you can cover about one kilometer in ten minutes.)

e Find out the number of people living in it.

e Find out about the peoples occupations, unemployment and poverty.
B. Listen to the Audio. Listen how the teacher talks about the population

of Bangladesh and answer the following questions.
.
S

Problems Around Us 55
Questions
Tick the best answer.
]. Bangladesh is a small country, because
a. its land area is small.
b. it has about 150 million people.
c. it is the 8 most populous country in the world.
d. it has limited resources.
2. Density of population in any country means
a. all the people in a country.
b. number of people living in one square kilometer.
c. 1000 people living in one square kilometer.
d. too many people living in one square kilometer.
3. Our yearly population growth rate is
a. 1.9% b. 1.40%
c. 2.1% d. 1.1%
4. Our birth rate is per thousand.
a. 6.1 b. 1.40
c. 20.1 d. 14
5. What will be the size of our population in 2050?
a. 150m b. 197m
c. 217m এ. 250m
C. _ Listen again and answer these questions.
]. How do you get the population growth rate of a country?
2. Why will the population of Bangladesh be so large in 2050?
২১
N
নি

56 English For Today
D. Read the chart and fill in the gaps with information from the table.
Use comparatives and superlatives where necessary. The table
shows facts about some countries including Bangladesh.
Bangladesh Sri Lanka India China
148,460 sq km (approx) | 62,710 sqkm 1 3,287,263 sq km | 9,600,000 sq km
sq km
Population | 165m 21.4m 1380 1420 m
in million
Density of | 1116 34] 464 153
population
per sq km
Birth rate 18.18 15.5 18.2 10.48
(per 1000)
Death rate | 5.5 4.2 73 74
(per 1000)
In terms of land area Bangladesh is (1) (larger) than Sri Lanka, but (2)
than India. China is, of course, (3) of all the four countries.
Sri Lanka has the (4) population among the four countries.
However, China has the (5) population shown in the chart.
In fact, China has the (6) population in the world and India
has the (7) highest population in the world. On the other
hand, China has the (8) growth rate among the 4
countries. Bangladesh has (9) growth rate than India, but
higher birth rate than (10) and (11) ________.
E. Write a paragraph about the population situation of any of the
countries above. Use the facts given in the chart in D above.
২১
S
AN

Problems Around Us 57
Lesson 3: Our Food and Shelter
A. Look at the pictures and answer these questions.

1. What do the people do in a tree or a boat?

2. Why do they do so?
: ee eee RR: Pa c+

 আছ _ 1 ae , . . nh চিনা es 180
. : ; a চা Fate mr সি নি an :

- - bt রা " Fy ৭] Ls =, " - 4k : রি ac |
3. Discuss what will be our problems if our population becomes double

the size it is now.
C. 1০980 what the teacher Ms Choudhury and her students are talking

about.
The class comes up with different problems. One group leader says, "The
scarcity of food will be a serious problem in the years ahead. It is true that our
agriculturists have developed new varieties of rice and its per acre production
has definitely increased. But the rate of increase in food production cannot keep
pace with the rate of population growth. This is because our land is fixed, i.e. we
cannot increase it, while our population is increasing rapidly."
Another group leader comes up with the housing problem in the country, which
he says, adds much to the food problem. He says, "Families are growing larger
in size and at the same time breaking into smaller families. Each smaller family
needs a separate house to live in. Also, the arable fields are being divided by
these smaller families among themselves. Mills and factories are being set up,
which occupy a considerable portion of our land. So while we need more land
to grow more food to feed more mouths, our land is shrinking day by day.

58 English For Today
"No way," another student argues. "Trees are being cut, hills are being cleared
and water bodies are being filled up --- all to meet the needs of too many
people."
"Thank you students," Ms Choudhury says, "You're quite right. Let me tell you
about this village where I was born and brought up. Things were not like this in
the past. I remember as a child, the village was so beautiful! The green paddy
fields and yellow mustard fields seemed to be unending. They used to wave and
dance in the breeze. There used to be a wood in the northern side of the village.
There was a tall tamarind tree in the middle of the wood. Also there was a big
banyan tree which looked like a huge green umbrella, with its aerial roots
hanging down. I often used to go there with my friends. We would often have
picnic there. While the boys would climb the tamarind tree and pick some
tamarinds, I and my best friend Rima used to swing from the hanging roots. But
now, look, the wood is gone. The beauty of the crop fields is spoiled by the
unplanned houses built here and there."
D. Tick the best answer.
1. The rate of increase in food production cannot keep pace with the
rate of population growth.
The sentence means that the food production
a. is as much as needed.
b. is less than what is needed.
0. is more than what is needed.
d. is sufficient for the population.
2. How can our housing problem add to our food problem?
a. After making houses, farmers do not have enough time to
work in the field.
b. After making houses, farmers do not have enough money
to buy food.
0. If you do not have a house, you cannot store your food.
d. For making too many houses, people are using the crop land.
3. What makes our land shrink day by day mentioned in line no. 13?
a. Families are growing larger in size.
b. Houses and factories are being built on it. S
নত

Problems Around Us 59
০. Smaller families need smaller houses.
d. Land grabbers are occupying portions of our land.
4. Many people may have to live on trees, because
a. they would like tree houses.
b. making houses on trees is less expensive.
০. they may not find land to make houses.
d. tree houses are safer during floods.
5. People are cutting trees to
a. plant more trees.
b. keep the environment clean.
0. make articles of furniture.
d. grow crops or make houses.

E. Make a list of things Ms Choudhury saw as a child in the village. Why
do you think she liked them?

F. Write a composition about your village or locality. Describe any
change in the things you have noticed over the years, such as houses,
fields, trees, plants ete.

Lesson 4: The Story of Lipi

A. Discuss in groups and suggest how we can control the high growth
rate of our population. Check whether your suggestions include
any of the following:

1. Raise awareness among the people, particularly in the rural areas, about
the bad consequences of having more children in the family.

2. Stop child marriage.

3. Keep the size of the family small with two children.

B. Read the story of Lipi and answer the questions.

In the next class Ms Choudhury tells her students the story of Lipi.

The year before last, Lipi, a 14-year old girl, was in class 9 in a rural school in

Rangpur. Lipi is the eldest of five children---three daughters and two sons. Their

 father is a day labourer working on other people's land and mother is a
& homemaker and a part-time worker at other people's homes. The parents,

60 English For Today
particularly the mother, found it really difficult to raise five children on the small
income the father could earn. Perhaps that is why Lipi's father wanted to marry
her off. But Lipi was not ready to accept what her parents wanted to impose on
her. She wanted to pursue her education. Her mother stood by her, though secretly.
When her father arranged her marriage with Tara Mia, the only son of a
farmer in the same village, she became greatly upset. Tara Mia was a widower and
illiterate, but well off. His father had a few acres of arable land and was influential
in the village. The marriage seemed to be inevitable.
Question 1
Discuss in groups and agree upon an answer to this question:
What do you think Lipi should do? Why?
Lipi first talked with her classmates and then with the Headteacher, who was
very sympathetic to her. He called a meeting of the teachers and students of the
school. He also invited the school managing committee members and some
respectable persons of the village to attend the meeting. The Headteacher
explained in detail the serious consequences that would follow Lipi's marriage.
She would be having children from very early age 15 or 16. It would create
constant health hazards to her. Her education would stop. On top of all, her
marriage against her will might shatter her future dream. At one stage, Tara Mia's
father stood up and tried to argue, "You are all making mistakes. Lipi would be
very happy if she got married with Tara Mia. She would have
everything money, clothes, home and status in the society. Why are you trying
to deprive her of this opportunity?"
But no, the big majority, who attended the meeting, supported the Headteacher.
Lipis marriage was called off. She is now studying at Carmichael College,
Rangpur.
Question 2
Make predictions. One is done for you.
If Lipi had married Tara Mia that time, ...

a. she would have become a mother of one or two children.

b.

টে. ৩

নে
d. নি

Problems Around Us 61
C. Fill in the blanks in the passage with will / would.
Ms. Anjali Barua, a retired college teacher, is a widow who lives in her own flat
in Dhaka. At this stage of her life, she wants to do something for the people of
her village in Sherpur district. Her only daughter lives in Khulna with her
husband and children. Right now she is in her village home. She is writing about
her future plan in a diary.
] dont exactly know how I should go about my plan. But one thing I know for
sure,I (1) 7111 need a lot of money for the work. If I had 5
million taka, I (2) start an adult education centre. Then if I
found an expert on adult education, I (3) prepare learning
materials for the people. If you ask him what the materials (4)
look like, he (5) be able to explain in details. I know if the
people attended the classes at the centre, they (6) learn
how to read, write and count. I (7) definitely give time to
this project. But to carry out the project successfully I (8) 
have to live in the village almost permanently. Here is a problem. Who
(9) take care of my flat in Dhaka? If I had a good, reliable man,
I (10) ___1708106 10110] ০0819081091 of my flat. But where
(11) I find such a man?
D. Read the beginning of the story. Write ten new sentences to complete
the story in a way you would like.
Nahar, an 18 year old garments worker lives with her family in a slum. She
dreams of having a life full of joy. One day while going to her work place, she
found a piece of gold in front of the factory gate.
Lesson 5: Lets Become Skilled Workforce
A. In groups discuss the following question and give your opinion
to the whole class:
Why should we learn English?
B. Read the conversation between Ratan and Rumi to find out
about the importance of English.
Rumi: You remember my brother Raihan, dont you? He applied for ৪ front
৩ desk officers job in a 5-star hotel.
Ss Ratan: What happened? Has he got the job?

62 English For Today

Rumi: No! He couldnt answer most of the questions in the interview.

Ratan: Why? He did well in the HSC, didnt he?

Rumi: Yes, he did. But the recruiting officer in the interview asked him questions
in English and he couldnt understand most of them.

Ratan: Sorry, but I have a different story to tell you. My cousin Sheela did
her HSC from a college in Mymensingh. She couldnt do as well as
Raihan in her exams, but she got a job as a crew member in Biman
Bangladesh. She said she had answered all the questions in English
both in her written test and interview.

Rumi: Great! She must be good in English. Well, then the key to getting some
jobs is English, isnt it?

Ratan: Yes, youre right.

C. Discuss in groups.

1. Try to find out why English is needed for a good hotel front desk
job and a flight crew member.

2. Choose two / three other jobs where English is needed and write
why and how English is used in those jobs.

D. __ Read what Ms Choudhury says to her students about learning English.

"Today there are many jobs where you need English. This is because the world

has become smaller. Vast distances are shortened by speedy transports. We can

talk to a person thousands of kilometers away on the phone or the Internet. So we
can communicate with the whole world easily. English has made this
communication easier.

There are many countries in the world with many languages, but to communicate

with them, you cannot use all the languages. So you need a common language

that you can use with more or less all the people in the world. English is that
common language. You can talk to a Chinese toy maker, a French artist, an Arab
ambassador or a Korean builder in one languageEnglish.

English, for us in Bangladesh, 15 all the more important. As we have seen earlier,

we are too many people in a small country. So if you learn English, you have the

best opportunity to find a good job, both within and outside the country. And that

is good news for millions of our unemployed youths." <

S
N

Problems Around Us 63
"But Miss, we learn English for 12 or 14 years, yet we do not find good jobs, "
says Rumi. She then tells the class about what happened to her brother. "Could
you please tell us why? Rumi asks.
"This is a very important question, Rumi. We should learn how to use English
both orally and in writing for doing things as needed in our work, such as
communicating with others at personal, social, national and international levels.
But unfortunately, at the moment we are learning English mainly for our exams,"
continues Ms. Choudhury. "Remember, English can greatly help you become
skilled workers."
"But where and how can we learn such kind of English, Miss?" asks Ratan. Ms.
Choudhury says, "We can learn English both in and outside the classroom.
Besides your textbooks, the radio, television, newspapers, magazines,
computers and other supplementary materials will greatly help you. During our
classroom activities, we'll see how we can learn English."
E. Write a paragraph by rearranging the following sentences or
sentence parts.
1. Youcan learn a common language in and outside the classroom.
2. You cannot speak all the languages of different people of different
countries to communicate with them.
3. For example, you can do businesses with a Chinese, a Japanese, a
French, an Arab or a Nigerian if you know English.
4. 4১150 other things like the radio, TV, computers and newspapers can
help you learn English.
5. Therefore, you need a common language, i.e. English, which is
understood by people more or less all over the world.
F. Discuss in groups and write answers to these questions.
1. Describe briefly the things that have made the present world smaller.
2. Give reasons why a common language is needed in todays world.
3. Why is English needed all the more in Bangladesh?
4. Howcan our youths become a skilled workforce?
G. Project: Find out how many people in your village or locality can
৩ speak or write English for communication. State their age, education
Ss and profession.

Unit Six
e
Our Neighbours
ডে ত জি C
*
চা | a
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e read, comprehend and summarise texts
e ask and answer questions
e read travel advertisements and talk about them
e select and write headings
e write letters to friends describing places of interest.
০
S
NQ

Our Neighbours 65

Lesson 1: Nepal, the Land of the Everest

A. _ Read the following passage on Nepal.

a. Known as the Landof Everest,
Nepal is one of the most
charming countries in Asia. The
Kingdom of Nepal is a small ake. . tty Ml
land of sublime beauty. It has i ০০, রর মী <a এ .
some of the worlds best and সপ সা দাশ -_. 
very important temples. It is a ee . চুর, রি না
country that is rich in scenic ae oh As শন agin
beauty and cultural heritage. রী নিন. রি টা 255

b. Nepal lies between India and the Tibetan part of China. This small country
has an area of 147,181 square kilometers. Southern Nepal is tropical low
land known as the 75791 Plains . This part of Nepal has hot summers and
warm winters. Here the temperatures reach up to 40C in April and May
and monsoon rains drench this region from June to September. The central
hill-lands including the ~, gy oT om Fe
Kathmandu and Pokhara valleys Siem - Ty 7 
have a temperate climate and fe OOP 2০ - Ngee a
are also influenced by the 4.. is ae ae
monsoon. North of that is the Thy me Rapes idee yt fore
slope of the main section of the ie... পপ oars :
Himalayan range. This part of ) a ৮, seh দিদা
Nepal has some of the highest |... 11 দয. ২ লরি
peaks of the world including Bo os শিলা, 7
Everest. ~

66 English For Today

৩. Nepal is home to nearly 29,000,000 people. The population is primarily
rural. Kathmandu, the capital city, has less than one million inhabitants.
Nepal's demographic features are complicated not only by dozens of ethnic
groups, but by different castes. In total, there are 103 castes and ethnic
groups living in this small country. The two largest of such groups are known
as Chetri and Bahun. Others include Magar, Tharu and Tamang, Newar,
Muslim, Gurung and Damai. About 48 percent of the people speak Nepali.
Among other languages spoken are Maithali, Bhojpuri, Tharu and Tamang.

d. Nepal is the holy land of Lord Pashupatinath and Gautam Buddha where the
Hindus and Buddhists have lived together in harmony for centuries. The
Temple of Pashupatinath is the most sacred Hindu shrine and one of the four
most important sites in the world for Shiva worshippers. Lord Buddha, the
light of Asia, was born in Lumbini in Nepal's southern plains, which makes
this a sacred pilgrimage destination for the Buddhists as well. In fact, many
Nepalese combine Hindu and Buddhist practices; many temples and shrines
are shared between the two faiths, and some deities are worshipped by both
Hindus and Buddhists.

e. The Kathmandu Valley is the richest cultural heritage centre of Nepal. The
three ancient cities of the Valley - Patan, Kathmandu and Bhaktapur -
represent an epitome of harmony in urban design, elegant architecture and
refined culture. These cities are famous for religious monuments unequalled
in the world. The seven monument zones situated within the Valley have
been named as World Heritage Sites by UNESCO.

{. Many festivals add dazzling colour to Nepal's vibrant culture, which are
celebrated throughout the year. Dasain or dusherra is celebrated nationwide
in October. This is the most important of all Nepalese celebrations and
includes the biggest animal sacrifice of the year. Tihar is celebrated in
November. Other festivals include the Holi and Chaitra Daisan. Some Hindu
festivals are the Haribodhini Ekadashi, Maha Sivaratri and the Krishna
Jayanti. There are Buddhist celebrations too and those include Mani Rimd,
Buddha Jayanti and Losar, which marks the Tibetan New Year.

B. The passage has six paragraphs (a-f). Choose the most suitable
headings for paragraphs (a-f) from the list of headings below. There
are more headings in the box than the paragraphs, so youwill not use |
all of them. =

Our Neighbours 67
List of headings
1. Climate that varies from place to place
2. A land of religious coexistence
3. A land of high peaks and Everest
4. A small country witha huge population
5. A blend of natural beauty and cultural heritage
6. The temples of Nepal
7. Many occasions to celebrate
8. A rich spot of cultural heritage
9. A small population with huge diversity
C. For each phrase below choose the meaning that is closest to the
meaning used in the passage.
1. tropical lowland
a. an area of land having humid climate
b. a land situated on the hill
০. a low land close to river
d. a land that lies at the foot of a hill
2. temperate climate
a. a weather condition of high temperature
b. a moderate climate
C. a climate with high rainfall
d. a climate that is uncomfortable to live in
3. ethnic groups
a. groups based on their religious faiths
b. groups of people living in the hills-tracts
0. groups having distinct racial and cultural features
d. groups who believe in Buddhism
4. pilgrimage destination
a. asacred place where people travel to perform religious rites.
b. ahistorical place with many old buildings.
৩ c. & (00115690001 great scenic beauty.
S d. the birthplace of a famous person.

68 English For Today
5. elegant architecture
a. temples of gods
b. graceful work of building crafts
c. buildings of historical importance
d. well-designed area of cultural acts
D. ~~ Answer the following questions.
1. How many ethnic groups are there in Nepal?
2. What do you know about the weather of Nepal?
3. Many Nepalese combine Hindu and Buddhist practices.- Explain this
statement with examples from the passage.
4, Which three cities of Nepal will you visit in order to see the rich samples
of Nepals cultural heritage sites?
5. Make a list of the festivals that are celebrated in Nepal.
6. Give at least three reasons why you might be interested to visit Nepal.
Also make a list of the places you would love to visit in Nepal.
E. Look at the advertisement of a package tour to Nepal.
Dhaka-Kathmandu-Pokhara Package Tour
Price: BDT 39,999/
Duration: 4 nights and 5 days
Package includes:
* Return air ticket with Bangladesh airport taxes &
Kathmandu departure taxes
* 2 nights accommodation in Kathmandu
* 2 nights accommodation in Pokhara
* Buffet: Daily Breakfast and Dinner
* Both way airport transfers in Kathmandu
* Kathmandu-Pokhara-Kathmandu by AC bus
* Half day sightseeing in Kathmandu Valley
s

Our Neighbours 69

ডি তিলে: সর

Now, discuss if the following statements are True/False. Give the correct

information if a statement is false.

a. The package includes the cost of travelling from Kathmandu airport
to the hotel in Kathmandu.

b. The tourists will be provided with breakfast, lunch and dinner.

c. The tourists do not have to pay extra for a half-day sightseeing in
Pokhara.

d. The tour operators will bear all visa related costs.

e. The tourists will go to Pokhara from Kathmandu by domestic airlines
flights.

F. Imagine that you have chosen the package tour shown in E to visit
Kathmandu and Pokhara. Now, write a letter to your friend
highlighting the main attractions offered by the package. In your
letter you should cover the following points:


S
তে

70 English For Today
e Duration of travel
e Means of transport used:
1) Dhaka-Kathmandu-Dhaka
2) Kathmandu-Pokhara-Kathmandu
 Accommodation facilities
 Breakfast, lunch and dinner
ও Total cost of the package
৬ Any other cost that is not covered by the package offer
Lesson 2: Sri Lanka: The Pearl of the Indian Ocean
A. Look at the picture. Ask and answer the following questions in pair.
1. What is the name of the country? ৯
2. What is the country surrounded by? ag লু
3. What do you know about the country? নি: ৮
B. Nowread the following passage to find your answers to the questions
in A.

a Anyone visiting Sri Lanka may often hear the word Ayubowan. This
word means "May you have the gift of long life. It is with this traditional
greeting that everyone is welcomed to 911 Lanka. Sri Lanka is
variously known as: Serendip, Ceylon, Teardrop of India, Pearl of the
Indian Ocean, etc. These names reveal the richness and beauty of this
island nation. Many travellers, from ancient mariners and merchants to ৩
present day tourists, have been attracted by the beauty of this island. Ss

Our Neighbours 71

b. Sri Lanka is located in the Indian Ocean, just off the south-eastern coast of

India. Shaped like a teardrop, the island of Sri Lanka measures about 415

kilometers from north to south, and about 220 kilometers from east to west, with

a total land area of about 65,600 square kilometers. It has more than 1340

kilometers of coastline.

c. Despite its modest size Sri Lanka has a

population of about 20 million. Sri Lanka is

amulti- religious, multi-racial and multi- ; = =

lingual country. The four major ethnic _

groups are the Sinhalese, Sri Lankan Tamils, | =i = রর
Indian Tamils and Sri Lankan Moors or ie rae 3 5 es
Muslims. A fifth group, the Veddhas are the ছা এ শি মি তি
original inhabitants of the island. The - a হা সি:
ancient history of Sri Lanka is depicted in ৪) 1 Stee শি
the Hindu epic the Ramayana and in the ils! পি
Mahavamsa or The Great Chronicle. Colombo: The capital city

d. Sri Lanka's economy has traditionally been based on agriculture. The
emphasis is on exporting crops such as tea, rubber, and coconuts. In fact, Sri
Lanka is the largest tea exporter of the world. The country is also a major
producer and supplier of a variety of spices such as cinnamon, cardamom,
pepper, cloves, and nutmeg. Cinnamon first originated in Sri Lanka and was
introduced later to the world by the Arab merchants.

e. Sri Lanka's archaeological treasures may be compared to other civilizations
of the past like the Golden Age of Greece, the Roman Empire and Mayan
citadels. The culture has been influenced by the western colonisers and eastern
traders. That resulted in developing a unique mix of races and religions, arts and

s
AN

72 English For Today
crafts, festivals and costumes in this small country.
f. Besides the man-made riches, one may find the God-given blessings of nature in
Sri Lanka. The island is circled by azure seas and is blessed with sandy beaches,
green hills, cascading waterfalls, abundant wildlife and a variety of flowers and
fruits. The country abounds with coconut groves, spice gardens, tea estates and
many other gardens and woods. Travellers from all over the world come to Sri
Lanka. Here, a weary traveller can pass a relaxing day by a palm-shaded lagoon
looking at the endless ocean. And for the adventurous, days can be full of
excitement snorkelling, swimming, fishing or sailing.
C. From your reading of the above text, complete the table with no more
than two words and/or numbers.
Sri Lanka: Facts
There are ...............,. | Agriculture is a Sri Lanka is blessed with
four main ethnic traditional form of awesome natural beauty.
groups. They are economic activity in | There are blue seas, sandy
Sinhalese, Sri Lankan Sri Lanka. The beaches, green hills, and
Tamils, ................ country exports many | flowing ................
and Sri Lankan Moors 1 crops and............... | The country has a very
who are also known 25 [11 Lanka tops the rich wild life. A wide
২২০০০০০০০০০০০০১ Phe world in tea export. variety of fruits and
earliest residents of Sri_ | The spice ১০১০০০০০০০০০০০০ are 8159
Lanka are known as ১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ WAS available there. Traveller
২০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ ০ found first in Sri can enjoy the ...............
shaded lagoons.
২১
=

Our Neighbours 73
D. 1000 passage in B has six paragraphs (a-f). Choose the most suitable
headings for paragraphs (a-f) from the list of headings below. There are
more headings in the box than the paragraphs, so you will not use all of
them.
List of headings
1. A beautiful island with natural richness
2. Teardrop of India
3. Geographical features
4. Arich multicultural setting
5. Some religious groups of Sri Lanka
6. A traditional economy
7. The land of cinnamon
8. A melting pot of the past civilizations
9. Tourist attractions and leisure activities
10. A country with beautiful beaches
E. Read the brief descriptions of some of the best tourist places in Sri
Lanka. Then discuss the questions that follow.
Anuradhapura
Anuradhapura is one of the ancient capitals of Sr শর জর
Lanka. The old city is today surrounded by monasteries, রাত er a
covering an area of over sixteen square miles. The city সি
is also significant in Hindu legend as the capital of King . রি ্
Ravana. ৪. টি
Bundala National Park
Bundala National Park is one of Sri Lanka's leading
destinations for birdwatchers. The park is also home (0 পাটানি
এই আলা সী
large populations of elephants, crocodiles, turtles andg= J - Lae
leopards. "সি |

74 English For Today
Hikkaduwa-Coral reef & sandy beaches
Hikkaiduwa-Coralreef sii লি
Hikkaduwa is a little town on the south coast of Sri _g
Lanka. It is well-known for its beach and corals. It 1s চরের ৮৪ 
principally a tourist destination, and serves as a great ই "Sao
beach with options to surf, snorkel and enjoy the sun. 
Dambulla
Major attractions of this city include the biggest and &
greatest potted cave temple complex of Sri Lanka. It is . ds oo
also famous for the Rangiri Dambulla Global Stadium, টি
which was built in just 167 days. The city also boasts of oy mae 7)
the biggest rose quartz mountain range in South Asia চি
and the iron wood forest.
Now discuss the following questions in pairs.
1, Which of the following tourist places do you like to visit?
e Places with beaches
e Places of historical importance
e Places that preserve wildlife
Explain why you like such a place.
2. If you are given an offer to visit any two of the four Sri Lankan cities
above, which two cities will you choose. Explain why.
F. Write a paragraph on some of the interesting places to visit in Sri
Lanka. Use your own words and the information given in section E.
Lesson 3: The Maldives
A. Discuss the questions in pairs.
1. Have you ever visited any island or seen any island on TV?
2. Have you ever heard of a coral island? Is there any coral island in Bangladesh?
Xo
3. What do you know about the Maldives? s

Our Neighbours 75
B. Now read the text below and answer the questions in C, D and E.
The Republic of Maldives is an island country in the Indian Ocean. It has 1199
islands that are clustered into 26 major atolls. An atoll is a ring-shaped coral reef
or a string of closely spaced coral islands. The natural coral reefs of the
Maldives are surrounded by the sea all around and stand out as a pearl in the
Indian Ocean. The Maldives is the eighth smallest country in the world with an
area of only 300 square kilometers. It is the smallest Asian country in terms of
population and size.
People have been living on the islands of the Maldives for nearly 3000 years.
They set sail from different parts of the world _ Asia, Arabia, Europe and
America  to come to these islands. The earliest settlers of the Maldives were
probably from southern India and Sri Lanka who came to these islands in the
fourth and fifth centuries BC. In the 12th century AD, sailors from East Africa
and Arab countries came to the Maldives. As a result, the Maldivians who were
originally Buddhists were converted to Sunni Islam in the mid-12th century. In
1344 Ibn Batuta, a famous Arab historian and scholar travelled around the
Maldives.
In the 16th century, the Portuguese conquered the Maldives and ruled the
country for 15 years. Although governed as an independent Islamic sultanate for
most of its history from 1153 to 1968, the Maldives was a British colony from
1887 to 1965. Following independence from Britain in 1965, the sultanate
continued to operate for another 3 years. On November 11, 1968, the sultanate
was abolished and replaced by a republic and the country assumed its present
name.
The Maldives is famous as a tourist destination because of its pleasant weather,
 heavenly beaches and lagoons, luxurious holiday resorts and the peace-loving
& people. The Maldives was ranked as the best country for beautiful beaches and

76 English For Today
facilities for recreation in 2008.
The Maldives is well known for being the lowest country in the world.
Unfortunately, this small country with idyllic natural beauty is under threat from
rising sea levels due to global warming. Most of the country is just 1.5 meters
above sea level with the highest point of 2.3 meters! Many predictions have been
made with respect to Maldives being swept away by the rising water level in the
Indian Ocean. When the power tsunami of 2004 hit the island nation, many of the
island's dry parts were flooded by the sea water. The government of the
Maldives has begun to purchase land from nearby countries for resettling
its people in case the islands go under water? In order to highlight the
threats of global warming to its low lying "শর  oe
islands, the government of Maldives held 7: aa এ. ৃ নব
a cabinet meeting underwater in 2009. Ltt me: *" 1...
That was the first ever underwater cabinet =" * রে eo jie
meeting in the world.The meeting took 0.১ ৮ রা: 4
place about 5 meters underwater, in a blue- , জি 4 *
green lagoon on a small island. While ty Nd
underwater, the cabinet signed a document ৯৮: 7: ae
calling on all nations to cut their carbon Underwater meeting
emissions.
C. 451 and answer the questions.
1. What is an atoll?
2. How many countries in the world are smaller than the Maldives
in size?
3. When was Islam introduced in the Maldives?
4. What makes the Maldives an ideal place for the tourists?
5. What dangers of climate change might affect the Maldives?
6. Do you support the idea of having a cabinet meeting underwater?
What could be the reason for holding such a strange meeting?
২
শ
NX

Our Neighbours 77
D. Complete the table with no more than two words and/or numbers.
4" and 5" centuries The early inhabitants of the Maldives arrived and
12" Century The sailors from African and Arab countries started
to settle in the islands. Buddhism was
১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ DY Islam.
A famous scholar and historian named Ibn Batuta
itt
16th century the Portuguese occupied the Maldives and became
aetna
২ টিন
1968 End of Islamic sultanate and .......১১০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০,
a
E. Say if the statements are True/False. Give the correct information
in case of a false statement.
1. Only seven countries in the world are smaller in size than the
Maldives.
2. No other South Asian century has a population smaller than the
Maldives.
3. The islands of the Maldives were inhabited in the 12th century.
4. The Maldives was an independent Islamic sultanate from 1153 to
1968.
৩ 5. The Maldives was ranked as the second best country for natural
Ss beauty in 2008.

78 English For Today
Lesson 4: India: Unity in Diversity
A. Read the following text and complete the activities in section B and C.
India is our closest neighbour. It is the largest
among South Asian Countries. In fact, India is =
the seventh largest country in the world with| ~  এছ ৭
an area of 3,287,590 square kilometers. India|] ০৮০ heat viens a
is bounded by the Indian Ocean on the South, | s+ ৬ me শা রা
the Arabian Sea on the West and the Bay of 1 mee .
Bengal on the East. It is bordered by Pakistan |  ne womens

eel ot
to the West; China, Nepal, and Bhutan to the bee ৩১0 নিন
North; and Bangladesh and Myanmar to the] এ লা ee
East. India is the world's most populous a. লি
country folletd by China. Its population is around 1.5 billion. New Delhi is
the capital of India and about 13 million people live in the city.
India is a land of ancient civilization. The social, economic and cultural diversity
of this vast country is the result of invasions by different races in the process of
history. Indian history begins with the birth of the Indus Valley Civilization and
the coming of the Aryans. During this period, Aryan culture flourished in this
part of the world. The fifth century saw the unification of India under Ashoka,
and it is in his time that Buddhism spread in many parts of Asia. In the eighth
century, Islam came to India for the first time and by the eleventh century it had
firmly established itself. In 1206, Qutbuddin Aybeck founded the Delhi
Sultanate. This was finally succeeded by the Mughal Empire in 1526, under
which India once again achieved a large measure of political unity.
It was in the 17th century that the Europeans came to India. This coincided with
the disintegration of the Mughal Empire, paving the way for supremacy of the
English, the French, the Dutch and the Portuguese who were vying with each
other to gain control of India. The English emerged as the 'victors'. In 1774,
Warren Hastings was appointed the first Governor General of India by the East
India Company. In 1876, Queen Victoria was given the title Empress of India by
the British Parliament and India came under the British rule. The British ruled ৩
India for nearly two hundred years. This period was marked by India's struggle Ss

Our Neighbours 79
for independence. Through a series of heroic and patriotic movements to restore
freedom, India got its independence in 1947.
The culture of India is one of the oldest and the most unique in the world. There
13 amazing cultural diversity throughout the country. The South, North, and
Northeast have their own distinct cultures and almost every state has carved out
its own cultural distinction. There is hardly any culture in the world that is as
varied and unique as India. There are 17 major languages and 844 dialects used
by the people of India.
India is a tourists delight. The Taj 7
Mahal, Fatehpur Sikri, the Qutb nm 4 লা
Minar and the Red Fort are a few of kre  wat এ ot
the many wonders which attract ip  | aa Be 
people from all over the world. 7 ; ie : fe 1 সু
Kashmir has been described as a - a ৮ ২ ৬৩ i bs চি *
paradise on earth. The country of "ami ord lg my ~~ | fh | ক
mountains, valleys, deserts, rivers 7 সুতা
and lakes offer the richness of a mini The Tajmahal
world within a single country. The Nilgiri mountains, hill stations like Ooty and
Darjeeling and the temples of South India, Ajanta and Ellora caves are the
places one can explore in India.
13. Discuss the following questions in pairs.

1. What do you know about the population and geographical area of

India?

2. When did Buddhism spread in India?

3. What happened to India during the Mughal Empire?

4. What are some of the tourist attractions in India?
C. Complete the flow chart below to show the history of India. Use one

word to fill in each gap.

q
শি

80 English For Today
Indus Valley Civilization and the coming of the Aryans.
8" century: ...............ss..... came to India for the first time.
1206: Establishment of the Delhi Sultanate by .....................
15" Century: the .................06........ of India under Ashoka
and spread of Buddhism.
1526: Beginning of the ........................ Dynasty
1774: Warren Hastings was ........................ the first
Governor General of India by the East India Company
In 1876 Queen Victoria was given the title, Empress of India, by
the British ..................
1947: India achieved its ......২১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০
Lesson 5: Bhutan: The Land of Happiness
A. Read the following text and complete section B and C.
Bhutan is called the Jewel of the Eastern Himalayas. This small, landlocked
country is located along the southern slopes of the Himalayan range, bounded
by Tibet in the North and India from the other sides. The official name of Bhutan
is Druk-yul which means land of the thunder dragon. It earned this name ৩
because of the fierce storms that often roll in from the Himalayas. The country Ss

Our Neighbours 81
has an area of 38,394 sq km and a so VAS
population of 716,896. Since it is int
cut off from the rest of the world by রর China
the Great Himalayas, a unique xy
culture and tradition based on Pakiswin Nep সপ
gentle Buddhist beliefs have a es 0..
evolved there over time. India 955 RC
CO

Bhutanese men wear Gho  a knee FX
length robe and women wear /  3 A
Kiraa sheet like cloth piece. N / 1,
Bhutanese houses are built from mud and stone, with wooden shingle roof. The
Bhutanese never use iron nails in their buildings. Usually, the Bhutanese build
each other's houses by exchanging labour within the community. Different
Festivals are celebrated all year round in Bhutan. Colourful masks are used in the
festivals which reflect the rich Bhutanese culture. Dances are performed by the
Buddhist monks to protect the valleys and ward off evil spirits. The main
religious festival is called 7shechus. The teachings of Lord Buddha are enacted
through mask dances for three to five days in the courtyard of the monasteries.
People attend these events in their best clothes, carrying picnic baskets. Another
major festival is called Losar. It is celebrated on Lunar New Year. People cook
special dishes and wear new clothes. It is a time for family get-together. Men
play archery or darts while women sing and dance.
Pure mountain air, crystal blue skies and ৫ | UE 7 ay,
pristine vegetation cover have made this small ই  aa
country an ideal destination for the environment # | ; 7 4 wy ; fe Ri
lovers. The ecosystem of this small nation 3S হি a! )
supports the existence of rich flora and fauna f: টু nie দি ২৯
which are protected by strict laws. Anyone ইভ Ae 
found guilty of killing even a black-necked 5. ৭ ঙগি 2.
crane could be sentenced to life in prison. 2: | -
The government of Bhutan has taken a i A -
number of steps to protect its bio-diversity. -

A Bhutanese family in traditional clothes

82 English For Today
Bhutan is the first country in the world with specific constitutional obligations
on its people to protect the environment. According to the constitution, at least
60 percent of the country must remain under forest cover at all times. Efforts are
also taken to protect the nation against the intrusion of foreign cultures and
values. The first foreign tourists were allowed into Bhutan in 1974. Now,
tourism is encouraged but is controlled and limited to about 6,000 visitors a
year. Bhutan is one of the last countries in the world to introduce television and
the Internet to its people. The government lifted a ban on TV and the Internet
only in 1999. The Bhutanese government has made it mandatory for all
Bhutanese to wear only their national dress in public.
Finally, the most interesting fact about Bhutan is that they are the only country
that measures success in Gross National Happiness rather than Gross National
Product! In 2006, Business Week rated Bhutan as the happiest country in Asia
and the eighth happiest country in the world.
B. Choose the most suitable answer for each of the questions below.
1. A unique culture and tradition has evolved in Bhutan because
a. fierce Himalayan storms often hit the country.
b. it is cut off from the other parts of the world.
টে. it has a very small area.
d. it is called the Jewel of the Eastern Himalayas.
2. Bhutanese houses are built from
a. mud, stone, woods with iron nails.
b. a sheet of cloth and wooden roof.
C. mud and stone with wooden roof.
d. bamboo and wood.
3. Which of the following activities is mentioned as a way of celebrating
Losar.
a. cooking special dishes and wearing new clothes
b. playing chess and badminton
C. having a trip to the neighbouring households
d. harvesting crops <
Q
N

Our Neighbours 83
4. According to Bhutans constitutional obligations
a. 60% of the country must remain under forest cover.
b. foreign nationals are not allowed to visit Bhutan even now.
0. citizens can not use the Internet in their houses.
d. people must always wear traditional Bhutanese clothes.
5. The progress of Bhutan as a nation is measured by
a. Gross National Income.
b. Gross National Happiness.
০. Gross National Product.
d. Per Capita Income.
C. Group work: You have read about some countries. Which one do you like?
Make a chart adding more information to it.
২৩
S
N

Unit Seven
People Who Stand Out
Te এ লী i i +
রি টি সি - tl L গু i.
oc. ৯ | 17
ry 4 
 . : 5
3, ae 
, 1] = =i)
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e read and demonstrate the understanding texts through silent reading
e ask and answer questions
e listen to an audio text for specific information
e write a dialogue.

N
নব

People Who Stand Out 85
Lesson 1: Zainul Abedin, The Great Artist
29 December 1914
ক Born Kishoregonj, East Bengal, British
-, . নার India (now Bangladesh)
. a  28 May 1976 (aged 61)
I. wt  Died Dhaka, Bangladesh
ye ; Nationality Bangladeshi
- ১1 - Education Government Art School, Kolkata
. uF, a 1 , Art School, London
oh Na " 7 Known for  Painting, drawing
' A ৷ | { - a The Struggle
, 1 tT Notable Rebel cow
1 ; 7 work Famine paintings
tee . "এ Nobanno
a  5 Study of a Crow
Hh . ন্ =, : Two faces
Zainul Abedin in 1955
A. Work in pairs and discuss the following questions.
1. Do you know this person? Why is he famous?
2. Can you name some of his world famous sketches?
B. Nowread the text below and complete the activities that follow.
Zainul Abedin (29 December, 1914 - 28 May, 1976) was a Bangladeshi painter.
He had an extraordinary talent and was internationally recognized for his
paintings. He became well known in 1944 through his series of paintings on the
great man-made famine in Bengal during British Colonial rule.
He played a vital role in the art movement in Bangladesh and was the founding
Principal of the Government Institute of Arts (Now Faculty of Fine Arts) at
University of Dhaka. His paintings on Bengal Famine are considered as his most
characteristic works. His homeland honoured him with the title Shilpacharya,
or the great teacher of arts for his artistic and visionary qualities. He was a
pioneer of the modern art movement and was rightly considered as the founding
father of Bangladeshi modern arts.
Abedin was born in Kishoregonj on 29 December, 1914. He spent most of his
childhood near the scenic banks of the Brahmaputra River. The river and the
open nature inspired him from his early life. The Brahmaputra later appeared in
 = many of his paintings and remained a great source of inspiration throughout his
career. As his tribute to the river Brahmaputra, he drew a series of water colour

86 English For Today
paintings in this regard. This helped him earn Governors Gold Medal in all
India Exhibition in 1938. This was the first time when he came under spotlight
and this award gave Abedin the confidence to create his own visual style.
Abedin got admitted to the Government School of Art in Calcutta (Now
Government College of Art and Craft, Kolkata, India). Here, he learned
European academic style for five years. Later, he joined the faculty of the same
school after his graduation. He was the first Muslim student to obtain First
Class with distinction from the school. In 1951, Zainul went to London to study
at Slade School of Art for two years. From the dissatisfaction of oriental style
and the limitations of European academic style, he was attracted to realism.
After his return from London, he started a new style called Bengali Style. Later
he realized the limitations of Bengali Style. Therefore, he went back to nature,
rural life and the daily struggles of men to make art that would be realistic but
modern in appearance.
ae যা হা
ক  ;  eek - ~ রর 1
US ৫ ১:৮১
i a ৭ ~ . a rs bee ৫ শা হু
ee পাস লহ ee + Bee? a পন
Struggle Rebel cow
if - 1 Fi | os তন  , . a eal | aM
or] 1 ; . _. .. - . . এ 7 
, . | লাল নি tam 4 ol  a 1 .
লা - 7" - শর
&  শি সু as a ee, ২
Rebel crow Labourer couple Famine sketch Ss

People Who Stand Out 87
In 1943, he painted a series of sketches on the man-made famine, which had
spread throughout Bengal. The famine killed thousands of people. The
devastating famine touched his heart. He used Chinese ink and brush and drew
sketches of the devastations of the famine on cheap packing paper. The series of
those sketches are known as Famine Sketches. Through those sketches, he
drew the helplessness and deprivation of the poor people, their miseries and
death without having food. He painted those starving people who were dying by
the roadside. These sketches are his most remarkable works, which spread his
name and fame around the world as a famous and humanitarian artist. Abedin
not only documented the famine but also showed its sinister face through
skeletal figures of people fated to die of starvation. He depicted the inhuman
story with very human emotions. These drawings became iconic images of
human sufferings. These sketches helped him to find his way into a realistic
approach that focused on human sufferings, struggle and protest. Through a 65
feet scroll, he depicted the mass movement of 1969 and with a 30 feet scroll
painting called Monpura; he showed the devastating cyclone of 1970 and the
sufferings of the people. Through the later sketch, he remembered the people
who died in that calamity.
In 1975, Zainul Abedin set up a folk museum at Sonargaon and a gallery in
Mymensingh named Shilpacharya Zainul Abedin Museum. He became actively
involved in a movement to preserve the heritage of Bengal and reintroduce
Bengal art from the roots of Bengali culture. He passed away on 28 May, 1976
in Dhaka.
Sources: Banglapedia and wikipedia
C. Ask and answer the questions.

1. How did Zainul Abedin become famous?

2. What were the themes of his famous sketches?

3. Give information regarding his education.

4. How did river Brahmaputra influence his sketches?

5. After the failure of Bengali style, which style did he adopt for his

৩ sketches? Why?
Ss 6. Why is he called humanitarian artist?

88 English For Today
D. Why did he establish the Folk Museum at Sonargaon and Shil
pacharya Zainul Abedin Museum at Mymensingh?
E. Look at the pictures in the text. Work in group and talk about them.
Then write briefly about what each picture portrays.
F. Nowwrite a paragraph on one of the pictures in the text. If necessary,
take help from Google.
G. Write an email to your friend about your recent visit to Folk Museum
at Sonargaon.
Lesson 2: The Art of Silence
A. Look at the pictures. Get into pairs and ask and answer the following
questions.
1. What can you see in the two pictures?
2. Do you think they are different from each other? Why?
পা
i 4d
. : :
Xo
বে
নব

People Who Stand Out 89
B. Read the text.

Culturally rich Bangladesh is the homeland of an artist whose fame took him
across the border and honoured him with different national and international
awards. Have you heard about Partha Pratim Majumder? He is a maestro
performer of miming art.

If food is the nutrition for a body, art is the nutrition of soul. To keep the souls
alive and fresh different arts like music, dance, paintings have evolved during
the ancient time. Humankind has tried to express himself from the very begin-
ning of civilization. These expressions have taken the forms of art with the touch
of his creativity in expressing the untold in silence. It is an art of depicting a
character, mood, idea, or narration through gestures and bodily movements
without any utterance. This ancient dramatic entertainment represents the primi-
tive time when people would use signs as a medium of communication.

In Bangladesh, the boy named Partha Pratim Mojumder from Pabna
overwhelmed people with this Art. He left people mesmerized by his graceful
presentations of art of silence. It was like a new era in theatre art in Bangladesh
when Partha came with effort to make people look at their everyday experience,
but in a new form. He made people reveal meanings for all trivial things of life
which they usually would overlook. He used to depict stories of sadness,
laughter, different characters, birds, insects or even animals through his miming.
Some of his topics are the portrayal of a thief stealing, one-sided love, picking
up flower and hurting it, delicate changes in nature etc. His actions often led
audience to their conscience on different issues. He is regarded as the pioneer of
miming in Bangladesh.

Partha cherished a passion for art from his very childhood. He was born in a
very cultural minded family on 18 January in 1954. His photographer father
nurtured him as a passionate lover of art. The family resided in a village called
Kalachandpara. There used be a lot of cultural programmes in Kalachandpara in
those days which had an impeccable influence on Parthas affection for art.
Destiny introduced Partha to a mime artist Mr. Jogesh Dutta in 1966 when he
went to live at his aunts home in Chandernagar, 30 kilometres away from
Kolkata. Partha could foresee his future and got admission in Mr. Duttas mime
academy in Kolkata. The major lift up of his life was when he presented a solo

90 English For Today
performance at Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy in 1979. The then French
Ambassador in Bangladesh Mr. Loic Moreau, having observed his talent as an
audience in that programme, offered him a scholarship at France.
Partha took all the opportunities to learn from Mr. Etienne Decroux and Mr.
Marcel Marceau, both of whom were legendary genius of miming at that time in
Paris. He was trained in the mime school called Ecole Internationale de
Mimodrame de Paris Marcel Marceau. Gradually he became a very busy artist
performing in Europe and America and he was highlighted in media too. Later
on this Bangladeshi legendary mime artist received the Moliere Award in the
year 2009 which is the highest honourable accolade in the French Theatre. Next
year, he was honoured with Ekushey Padak for the contributing to Bangladesh.
He was also awarded with Chevalier de Iodre des Art et des Letters (Knight in
the order of Arts and Humanities) in 2012 for his contribution all over
the world.
This great artist is now looking forward to opening an international miming
institute in Bangladesh. We hope more Partha Pratim Majumder comes out from
the dream institution.
C. Choose the best answers.
1. Miming isa
a. solo dance b. drama without sound
c. music d. recitation
2. What is not synonym for the word mesmerize mean?
a. make spell bound b. overwhelm
c. hypnotise d. shock
3. Who was not Partha Pratims trainer?
a. Marcel Marceau b. Jogesh Dutta
c. Loic Moreau d. Etienne Decroux
4. Which year did Partha Pratim Majumder receive Ekushey Padak?
a. in 2010 b. in 2009
c. in 2011 d. in 2012
8

People Who Stand Out 91
D. Read the text B again. See if the following statements are True or False.
If false, give the correct information.
a. Partho Pratim belonged to a culturally enlightened family.
b. Kalachandpara was 30 kilometres away from Kolkata.
c. Ecole Internationale de Mimodrame de Paris Marcel Marceau is an
international award.
d. Partha Pratim took his topics from very trivial issues of everyday life.
e. Performance at Shilpakala Academy created the major opportunity for
him.

E. Read the statements below and form appropriate questions for each

of them.

a. The birthplace of Partha Pratim Majumder is in Pabna.

b. Partha Pratim developed a passion for art from his childhood.

c. Jogesh Dutta was a renowned mime artist in Kolkata.

d. Partha Pratim performed in Europe and America.

e. Partha Pratims dream is now to open an international miming school
in Bangladesh.

F. Listen to the audio and complete the chart about Partha Pratim.
1987 [MasterofMime |
1987 Journalist Association

of Malayasia
2009 ee
Munir Chaudhury
Award
2010 | | Bangladesh
Knight in order of Arts
and Humanities
q
q

92 English For Today
G. Project: Do you know anyone who has skills to perform a special fit?
Write about the person covering the following points.
@ the first time the person came to know about it
@ =the time the person began to practise it
@ people who supported him/her
@ his/her achievements/recognitions
Lesson 3: The Beginning
A. Look at the picture and discuss the following questions in pairs.
1. Who is there in the picture? J
2. Why is she famous? :
B. Read the text and choose the best answer. ২
It was late summer, 26 August 1910. A little ease. |
girl was born to a rich Catholic merchants ee - .
family of Albanian descent in a small town টি 1
called Skopje, Macedonia. She was the AN
youngest of the three siblings and was টি) ক:
named Agnes Gonxha Bojaxhiu. Who could  ৬
imagine at the time that this little girl fi F
would one day become the mother of i x
humanity, loving and serving the poorest of ট
the poor. Yes, we are talking about none other than Mother Teresa.
At the age of 12, she heard a voice from within that urged her to spread the love
of Christ. She decided that she would be a missionary. At the age of 18 she left
her parental home. She then joined an Irish community of nuns called the Sisters
of Loreto, which had missions in India.
After a few months of training at the Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary in
Dublin, Mother Teresa came to India. On May 24, 1931, she took her initial
vows as a nun. From 1931 to 1948, Mother Teresa taught geography and
theology at St. Mary's High School in Kolkata (then Calcutta). However, the
widespread poverty in Kolkata had a deep impact on Mother Teresa and in 1948
she received permission from her superiors to leave the convent and devote ও
herself to caring for the poorest of the poor in the slums of Kolkata. a

People Who Stand Out 93
1. What does mother of humanity mean in the text?
a. a good mother
b. a kind mother who has many children
c. a mother who likes humans
d. a mother figure who serves the poor like her own childern
2. Why did Mother Teresa want to be a missionary?
Because she heard
a. the voice of her neighbours discussing it.
b. a voice in her dream.
C. a voice within herself.
d. the voice of her parents talking about it.
3. Mother Teresa set out to join the missionary of the Sisters of Loreto in
the year
a. 1927 b. 1928
c. 1929 d. 1930
4, Mother Teresa took her first vows as a nun at the age of
a. 18 b. 19
c. 20 এ. 21
C. Read the text in A again and answer the questions.
1. Where did Mother Teresas ancestors come from?
2. Where was her fathers home?
3. Why did she want to become a missionary?
4. What made her different from other girls at such an early age? What
words and expressions are used in the text to describe this difference?
৩ 5. What did Mother Teresa do in the first seventeen years in India?
Ss 6. Who did she work for? How?

94 English For Today

Lesson 4: Love for Humanity

A. Listen to the Audio and fill in the gaps.

To prepare herself to work with the , Mother Teresa took an

intensive medical with the American Medical Missionary

Sisters in , India. Her first course of action in Kolkata was

to____s children from the slums and start to teach them. Financial

support and volunteers came to give a hand to Mother

Teresa in her work for .In 1950 her group, now called

the Missionaries of Charity, received ________Status_as_ a religious

community. Members took the vows of poverty, chastity

(purity), and , but they added a fourth vow to give free
to the most poor.

The Missionaries of Charity received publicity, and Mother

Teresa used it to her work. In 1957 they began to work with

lepers (those suffering from leprosy, which is a terrible infectious disease).

Gradually from one school they to nine elementary schools

in Kolkata. They also opened a home for and abandoned

children. Soon they were in more than Indian cities. Mother

Teresa also visited other such as Sri Lanka, Australia,

Tanzania, Venezuela and Italy to begin new foundations.

Mother Teresa's group to expand throughout the 1970s. They

opened new in places such as Amman, Jordan, London,
; and New York. By 1979 Mother Teresa's groups

had more than different operations in over twenty-five

countries around the world, with dozens more ventures to follow.

B. Read the completed text and say if the following statements are True

or False. If false, give the correct information.
1. Mother Teresa took a thorough medical training from the USA.
2. At first she collected children from the streets and gave them food and ৩
clothing. Ss

People Who Stand Out 95
3. She and her group started to look after and care for the lepers.
4. It took them a long time to go to other cities of India.
5. Mother Teresa went to several countries.
C. Read the text in A again and complete the chart given below.
D. Read the text in A again and answer the following questions.
1. What did Mother Teresa initially do before beginning to work
for humanity?
2. How many vows did the Missionaries of Charity take? What were they?
3. What did Mother Teresa and her group do?
Now write the answers in your exercise book.
E. Do you know anyone in your locality who helps the needy and does
so to make others happy? Write a short composition about him/her.
Lesson 5: Love for Humanity
A. Read more about Mother Teresa.
Mother Teresa was moved by the sight of the sick and dying on the streets of
Kolkata. She founded a home for the dying destitute and named it 'Nirmal
Hriday', meaning Pure Heart. She and her fellow nuns brought the dying people
off the streets of Kolkata to this home. They were lovingly looked after and cared
for. Since then many men, women and children have been taken from the streets
and carried to Nirmal Hriday. These unloved and uncared for people get an
opportunity to die in an environment of kindness and love. In their last hours
they get human and divine love, and can feel they are also children of God. The
S Missionaries of Charity try to find jobs for those who survive, or send them to
& homes where they can live happily for some more years in a caring environment.

96 English For Today
Regarding commitment to family, Mother Teresa said, "May be in our own
family, we have somebody, who is feeling lonely, who is feeling sick, who is
feeling worried. Are we there? Are we willing to give until it hurts in order to be
with our families, or do we put our interest first? We must remember that love
begins at home and we must also remember that future of humanity passes
through the family".
Mother Teresa's work has been 4 1772,
recognised throughout the world . ty i}
and she received a number of fae  নল.
awards. These include the Pope = - wy ae
John XXIII Peace Prize (1971), + a - ;
the Nehru Prize for Promotion of ; ae ay 1 ৬৪ এ
International Peace & Understanding 1 | eT:
(1972), the Balzan Prize (1978), - -
the Nobel Peace Prize (1979) and সু রে ক
the Bharat Ratna (1980). = ill he vt
Mother Teresa died at the age of 87, on 5 September 1997. The world salutes her
for her love and compassion for humanity. She has taught us how to extend our
hand towards those who need our love and support irrespective of creed, caste
and religion. The picture of Mother Teresa, draped in a white and blue-bordered
sari, with a wrinkled face, ever soft eyes and a saintly smile, lives on in our
mind.
B. Now say whether the following statements are True or False. If false,

give the correct information.

1. Mother Teresa was moved to see the diseases that spread in the

streets of Kolkata.
2. She opened a home for the orphans.
3. She and her group brought in the dying people from the streets of
Kolkata.
s
Q

People Who Stand Out 97
4. Nirmal Hriday was founded so that the poor people who are dying
can get love and care before death.
5. Mother Teresa said that humanity passes through charitable
organizations.
6. We have learnt from Mother Teresa how to come forward to help
only those who belong to a special caste.
C. Read the text in A again and write the answer to the following
questions in your exercise book.
1. Why do you think Mother Teresa won so many awards?
2. What does Nirmal Hriday stand for?
3. Why do you think the home is named Nirmal Hriday?
4. Why did Mother Teresa want the dying people to feel that they too
deserve care and love?
5. What are the things that we have learnt from Mother Teresa?

98 English For Today
Lesson 6: The Wizard of Apple
A. Look at the picture and ask and answer the questions.

1. What do you see in the box beside? 4

2. What does this logo stand for? 

3. Which company uses this logo for its

products?
4. Do you know the logo of any Bangladeshi
product?

5. Do you like it? Why/Why not?
B. 1২980 about Steve Jobs.
Steven Paul Jobs (24 February 1955-5 October 2011) , most popularly known
as Steve Jobs was the co-founder, chairman and chief executive officer of Apple
Inc. He was the pioneer of the personal computer revolution. He was famous for
his career in the electronic field of computers and consumers. This became
possible through the marketing of Apple computers.
In 1985, Jobs left Apple after losing a power battle with the board of directors.
He then founded NeXT, a computer platform development company
specializing in the higher education and business market. Apple, howover failed
to bring up any new operating system during Job's absence. Jobs returned to
Apple as an adviser, and took control
of the company as an interim CEO. - .
By 1998, Jobs brought Apple back নি
to profitability from the verge of Fr ay গুদ |
bankruptcy. He supervised the 4 Mapes tase *
development of iMac, iTunes, iPod, a el জজ
iPhone and iPad. These devices are ০ 
so simple and user friendly that even 
a child can operate them. 7

টব
নব

People Who Stand Out 99
He supervised the company's Apple Stores, iTunes Stores and the App Stores
too. The success of these products and services brought about steady financial
returns for several years and pushed Apple to become the world's most valuable
publicly traded company in 2011. This triumph is regarded as the greatest
turnarounds in the business history.
Steve Jobs has been highly acclaimed as a visionary leader. He has changed
people's perspective towards the computer and how they use it, consume
personal media and how they communicate with each other. Hence iBooks,
iPhones, iPods and iPads have become extremely popular. Jobs saw and felt the
need of Wi-Fi (wireless Internet connection) in laptops. It is he who made Wi-Fi
a standard feature of every laptop, and of many other devices worldwide. So
Jobs' dream to be anywhere anytime became a reality.
Jobs also co-founded and served as chief executive of Pixar Animation Studios.
He became a member of the board of directors of The Walt Disney Company in
2006, when Disney acquired Pixar.
C. True or False? If false, give the correct information.

1. Jobs spent his entire career working for Apple.

2. He became famous because he knew how to market computers

and keep the buyers happy.

3. He became the chairman of The Walt Disney Company.

4. Jobs left Apple in 2001.

5. Jobs was a visionary.
D. Read the text in B again and answer the following qustions.

1. Write about Jobs' successful career.

2. What does 'power battle mean?

3. How did Jobs manage to bring Apple back to profitalriity ?

4. Why was he called a visionary?

২৩
Ss 5. Why did Jobs feel that Wi-Fi connection was needed in laptops?

100 English For Today
E. Pairwork: Write a dialogue about the contribution of Steve Jobs on
ICT and do a role play.
Lesson 7: Jobs Childhood
A. Read the text and write answers to the questions that follow.
A car mechanic Paul Jobs and his wife Clara Jobs adopted Steve who was
abandoned at birth. Paul and Clara loved Steve very much. They made him feel
that he was 'chosen' and very special.
One of his colleagues, Del Yocam said about Steve, "I think his desire for
complete control of whatever he makes derives directly from his personality and
from the fact that he was abandoned at birth."
Jobs' mother taught him how to read and write before he went to the elementary
school. So when he went to school, he found out that he knew everything that the
teachers were teaching. He got bored and played pranks to keep himself busy.
This continued for the first few years. It was clear from his behaviour that he
could not accept other people's authority. He said, "I encountered authority of a
different kind that I have never encountered before, and I did not like it."
A turning point came when he was in grade four. His teacher Imogene Hill
watched him very closely for some time and soon found out how to handle him
and get things done by him. In order to get things done she used to give him
money and food. One day after school, she gave Jobs a workbook with math
problems in it. She said,"I want you to take it home and do this." She showed
Jobs a huge lollipop and said, When you are done with it, if you get it mostly
right, I will give you this and five dollars. "Within two days, Jobs solved the
math problem and returned the book to his teacher.
This continued for a couple of months and Jobs enjoyed learning so much that he
did not need any return. Also he liked his teacher very much and wanted to
please her. In Ms. Hill's class, Jobs felt he was special. At the end of the fourth
grade, Jobs did very well. It was clear not only to Jobs and his parents but also to
the teachers that he was exceptionally intelligent. The school proposed that Jobs
should skip two classes and go into the seventh grade. This would mean that Jobs
would find the study challenging and he would be motivated to study. His
parents had him skip only one grade. ৩
নে
Source: Steve Jobs by Walter Isaacson a

People Who Stand Out 101
Questions
1. What do the words chosen and special mean in the text. Explain.
2. Why didnt Jobs enjoy school?
3, What did he do to keep himself entertained?
4. Why couldnt Jobs accept other peoples authority at school? Why
hadnt he come across other peoples authority before?
5. Why did Jobs have the wish to control everything?
6. How did Jobs teacher Imogene Hill keep him busy?
B. Match the words with their meanings as _ used in the context.
adopted deserted /left alone
abandoned | encourage
encounter | power or right to control
authority | a playful or mischievous trick
pranks legally took and raised anothers child
motivate | to face
২১
S
AN

Unit Eight
World Heritage
erry 28 ১ ই
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e listen for specific information
e read and understand texts through silent reading
e ask and answer questions
e describe a place.
২১
্

World Heritage 103
Lesson 1: The Shat Gambuj Mosque
A. Look at the picture. Work in pairs. Talk about the picture and ask
and answer the following questions.
1. What can you see in the ae 2 a
picture? হব... সু vir 7 র্
2. Do you have a building like এ ph is 
this in your town/Vvillage? 1? . গেছে
122 ৬ , রি 1. . ts
3. What do we call it? ad শি ৭ 4.118 68 7.
4. What is it used for? 4৮2 is ২৮২, _... ve
B. Read the text and complete the table given after it.
'Heritage' is what we inherit from the past, live with in the present and then pass
on to our children or future generations. Our unique source of life and inspiration
is our cultural and natural heritage. When we speak of "World Heritage, it
indicates places and sites that we inherited from the past and pass on to the
future generation of the entire world.
The 'Shat Gambuj Mosque' in Bagerhat is such a heritage. It became a UNESCO
World Heritage Site in 1985.
Originally, the historic Mosque City was known as 'Khalifatabad". It is situated
at the outskirts of Bagerhat town,  not very far from the dense mangrove forest
of the Sundarbans. Khalifatabad was a Muslim colony. It was founded by the
Turkish general, a saint warrior Ulugh Khan Jahan in the 15" century. The
infrastructure of the city reveals significant technical skills in many mosques as
well as early Islamic monuments. Baked bricks were used for the construction
of the buildings. The planning of the city was dominated by the tradition of
Islamic architecture and the decorations were a combination of Mughal and
Turkish architecture.
Khan Jahan built a network of roads, bridges, public buildings and reservoirs to
make the city habitable. There were about 360 mosques in the city. Among them
the most remarkable is the multi-domed Shat Gombuj Mosque. The mosque is
৩ unique in the sense that it has 60 pillars that support the roof, with 77 low height
S domes. The 4 towers at 4 corners have smaller domes at the top as well. The

104 English For Today
vast prayer hall has 11 arched doorways on the east and 7 each on the north and
south for light and ventilation. It has 7 aisles running along the length of the
mosque and 11 deep curves between the slender stone columns. These columns
support the curving arches created by the domes. The thickness of the arches is
6 feet and have slightly narrowing hollow and round wall.
The west wall in the interior has 11 'mihrabs' (niche in mosque pointing towards
Makkah). These mihrabs are decorated with stonework and terracotta. The floor
of the mosque is made of brick.
Besides being used as a prayer hall, Khan Jahan used the mosque as his court
too. Today, it is one of the greatest tourist attractions and one of the best
architectural beauties of Bangladesh.
শা ____________
পা
ie _________

S
NN

World Heritage 105
C. Look at the picture of the Tara Mosque in Dhaka. Read the information
and write a description of the mosque with the help of the given clues.

Location: Dhaka, Abul Khairat Road

Style: Mughal

Number of domes: 5 i

Decoration: different sizes of stars on 5) রা

dome and outside wall w+ tn i MO he Le
Bele he Ae Parka লি eae 202 কা |

Materials used for decoration: Chinaware i at ame a ears ee

Interior of the mosque: mosaic floor, floral ZT .

tiles on the wall revo 7! - )

Built by: Mirza Ghulam Pir a respectable

Zamindar of Dhaka

Time: early 18" century

Lesson 2: The Somapura Mahavihara

A. Read the text.

Paharpur is an important archaeological site situated in a village named

'Paharpur' in Naogaon district of northern Bangladesh. Naogaon is mainly plain

land but in the middle of it stood a hill covered with jungle. When the jungle was

cleared and the hill excavated, there emerged a lofty ruin of an ancient temple.

The temple is about 24 meter high from the surrounding level. 'Pahar' means hill.

Hence the name Paharpur.

The Paharpur site has been excavated and re-excavated a number of times by

archaeologists. Sir Alexander Cunningham, archaeological surveyor of India,

visited the place in 1879. He intended to carry out an extensive excavation but

was prevented by the land owner. Nevertheless, he was satisfied with whatever

excavation he was permitted to carry out. The site was declared to be protected

by the Archaeological Survey of India in 1919 under the Ancient Monuments

Preservation Act of 1904.

106 English For Today

Systematic and regular excavation started jointly by the Archaeological Survey

of India, and Varendra Research Society of Rajshahi and Calcutta University in

1923. They excavated the south-west corner of the monastery. Next, in 1925-26,

historian and archaeologist RD Banerjee excavated the northern part of the central

mound. From 1926-27 onward, excavation was carried out under the super-

vision of KN Dikshit.

The Department of Archaeology of Bangladesh brought the site under further

excavation after independence. The operations took place in two phases. The

first phase was initiated in 1981-82 and continued till 1984-1985. The second

phase was started in 1988-89 and continued till 1990-91.

Pre-liberation expeditions have revealed the architecture of a vast Buddhist

monastery, the Somapura Mahavihara. It is dominated by the central shrine,

attracting immediate attention by its lofty height and unusual architectural

design.

Somapura Mahavihara was one of the most famous Buddhist institutions for

monks of ancient Bengal and Southern Asia. The excavated complex at

Paharpur has been identified as Somapura Mahavihara built by the second Pala

king Dharmapala (781- 821 AD). Some clay seals from the ruins bear the

inscription Shri-Somapure-Shri-Dharmapaladeva-Mahavihariyarya-bhik-

su-sangghasya.

pa : <7 na thy. , . - 7. 7 _. " 1 =

The Pala rulers were devout Buddhists and they founded a number of

monasteries throughout their growing empire. Some of them became great

centres of learning and their reputation quickly spread throughout Asia.

Somapura Mahavihara's close relationship with the ruling dynasty implied that it

shared the political ups and downs of its benefactors. 
S
AN

World Heritage 107
B. Match the words with their meanings.
archaeological rubbles/wreckage
excavate widespread
lofty ancient cultural remains
extensive pious
systematic uncover something with difficulty
debris grand
devout done methodically
C. Read Text in A again and choose the correct answer.
1. Paharpur is
a. atypical Bangladeshi village. b. an extraordinary village.
c. avery small village. d. a village on top of a mountain.
2. After excavation, the archaeologists discovered a huge
a. kings palace. b. emperors courtyard.
c. Buddhist monastery. d. Hindu temple.
3. How many phases of excavation of Paharpur have been mentioned in
the text?
a. four b. ৮6
0. Six d. seven
4. What objects indicate that the site was built by the second Pala king?
a. earthen seals b. ceramic seals
c. stone seals d. iron seals
5. The word benefactors in the text means
a. banks. b. famous businessmen.
c. people with money. d. financial supporters.
S
N

World Heritage 107
B. Match the words with their meanings.
archaeological rubbles/wreckage
excavate widespread
lofty ancient cultural remains
extensive pious
systematic uncover something with difficulty
debris grand
devout done methodically
C. Read Text in A again and choose the correct answer.
1. Paharpur is
a. atypical Bangladeshi village. b. an extraordinary village.
c. avery small village. d. a village on top of a mountain.
2. After excavation, the archaeologists discovered a huge
a. kings palace. b. emperors courtyard.
c. Buddhist monastery. d. Hindu temple.
3. How many phases of excavation of Paharpur have been mentioned in
the text?
a. four b. ৮6
0. Six d. seven
4. What objects indicate that the site was built by the second Pala king?
a. earthen seals b. ceramic seals
c. stone seals d. iron seals
5. The word benefactors in the text means
a. banks. b. famous businessmen.
c. people with money. d. financial supporters.
S
N

108 English For Today
D. 1২০90 the text again. Work in pairs. Ask and answer the following
questions. Then write the answers in your exercise book.
1. Why is the village named Paharpur?
2. Where is it located?
3. What is it famous for?
4. What did Cunningham find when he was digging the Paharpur site?
5. Why was the site officially stated to be preserved?
E. Do you have any old or ancient relic in your city/town/village? Write
about it with the help of the following questions. If you dont, surf
the Internet for a relic in Bangladesh that you find interesting and
write about it.
e When was it established? e Who built it?
e How does it look like? e How big is it?
e What was it for? e What is its present condition?
e Why do you like it?
Lesson 3: The Statue of Liberty এ.
A. Look at the picture and talk about it in a ;
5 [নর
B. Read the following questions first. Now = A a
listen tothe audio about the Statue 4 1.
of Liberty and answer the questions. ৮ এ
161)
1. Where is the Statue of Liberty situated? র
2. Which country gave the statue as a gift? AF
3. The gift was meant for which country? ৩
N
S
শে

World Heritage 109
4. On what occasion was it given?
5. When was the statue given?
6. What does the statue represent?
C. ___ Listen to the text again and complete the chart.
situated __ _
10079 _ 7
প্রা টিভা 77777
reason for the git OO
0
occasion 777
the statue symbolises Po
framework made of ee
amount of copper used
তে SSSOSC~~S
year it was declareda UNESCO World | si
HeriageSite |
D. 1২090 the text and answer the following questions.
The French sculptor Frederic Auguste Bartholdi was assigned to design and
complete a sculpture Liberty Enlightening the World within 1876, so that it
could be a gift for the Americans on the occasion of the hundredth anniversary
of the American Declaration of Independence. The statue was a joint venture
between the USA and France. The French people built the statue and
assemble it in the States, and the people of the USA built the pedestal for the
statue.
Raising money for the pedestal was completed in August 1885. The construction
of the pedestal was finished in April 1886. In the meantime, France completed
the Statue in July 1884. They sent it to New York by the French warship
Isere' in 1885. While transporting the statue, it was split up into 350 pieces and
packed in 214 crates.
as
aq

110 English For Today
It took four months to put the Statue together and place it on the pedestal.
Thousands of people saw the unveiling ceremony of the Statue of Liberty on 28
October 1886.
The Freedom that the Statue stands for is not stationary. The broken chain
wrapped around her feet, sticking out from the bottom of her robe, symbolizes
her free forward movement, enlightening the world with her torch, free from
oppression and slavery.
The Statue's original torch was the first part constructed in 1876. It was replaced
by a new copper torch covered in 24K gold leaf in 1984. The torch is lighted by
flood light at night. The original torch is currently located in the lobby of the
monument. Access to the torch has been closed since 1916.
From 28 October 2011, on her 125th anniversary, the Statue of Liberty was also
named "Liberty Enlightening the World Wide Web". The credit goes to a series
of new web cams placed around her torch. Several amazing views will be just a
click of a mouse away. On clear days, three cameras provide unobstructed views
of scenes far and near. Two cameras provide an ultra wide-angle interactive view
of the famous golden torch. The remaining camera looks downwards towards the
crown of The Statue of Liberty, her face and the tablet she is holding. So a person
can have access to the web cam's live feed of The Statue of Liberty from
anywhere in the world.
Questions:
1. On what occasion did the French government give the Statue of Liberty
to the USA?
2. When did she reach her destination?
3. How was she transported?
4. How has new technology made it possible for people to see the statue
from anywhere they are?
5. What do you understand by the expression enlightening the world?
২
নে
S

World Heritage 111
Lesson 4: Lake Baikal
A. Look at the picture. Work in pairs
and ask and answer the following
questions. =i 28
1. What do you think it is?  =
2. Where is this situated? 2০০৩ oe এ
3. Are you familiar with something like this? Lake Baikal
B. Read the text to find out if your guess about questions 1 and 2 is right.
Lake Baikal is the deepest and one of the biggest and most ancient lakes of the
world. It is situated almost in the centre of Asia. Lake Baikal is a gigantic bowl
set at 445 meters above sea level. This grand, enormous, unusual and charming
miracle of nature is located in the south of Eastern Siberia, in the Buryat
Autonomous Republic and region of Irkutsk, Russia.
The lake covers 31,500 sq km. It is 636 km long and on an average of 48 km wide.
The widest point of the lake is 79.4 km. The water basin occupies 557,000 sq
km. and contains 23,000 cu km (cubic kilometer) of water, which is about one
fifth of the world's reservoir of fresh surface water.
The average water level in the lake is never higher than 456m. The average
depth of Lake Baikal is 730 m, and its maximum depth in the middle is 1,620 m.
It would take about one year for all the rivers of the world to fill Baikal's basin,
and would take four hundred years for all the rivers, streams and brooks now
flowing into Siberian lakesea to do the same.
There are hot springs in the surrounding area of Lake Baikal. The quality of the
water of these springs is excellent. The lake acts as a powerful generator and bio
filter producing this water. Baikal is a stormy lake. Autumn is the most stormy
time. The wind blows in various directions.
The weather depends on the wind. If it is blowing from the north, the weather is
bright and sunny. The water of the lake looks green and dark blue. But if the
winds get stronger, Baikal turns black, waves rise high with white crest. The
এ beauty of Lake Baikal is exceptional.
S
AN

112 English For Today
C. Match the words with the meanings.
outstanding
crest a surprising event that is not explicable
by natural or scientific laws
bowl-shaped depression filled with water
D. Read the text in C again and complete the chart.
চট
হারার রা
চারার রা
maximum depth/
utmost/highest depth
extended over an
area/occupies an area
শসপপপপল 11
E. 19106 21191 of attractive features of Lake Baikal.
F. Have you seen a lake or river that has attracted you very much? If yes,
write what aspects of the lake or river appealed to you. If not, go and ৩
see a lake or a river. Then write about it. Ss

Unit Nine
এ
Unconventional Jobs
| . "Fr q টি, _ চলার a pe Pan = লি রী ৃ নি

Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to

e describe familiar objects

e read intensively and extensively

৬ participate in debate, discussion

ও write about jobs and situations

e read for skimming, scanning, and inferring

[Skimming = to read quickly to get the gist of a text

Scanning = to read quickly to get specific information

Inferring = to read text to be able to make logical conclusions.]

114 English For Today

Lesson 1: Jobs that People Do

A. Many of us think that we must have a steady big job to be happy
in life. Is that always true? Why/Why not?

B. Read the text. It is about a young entrepreneur, Sayeed Kamal.
Notice what he thinks about job and happiness. Then answer the
questions that follow.

I know you will wonder if 1 say | সা " মনিরা . সে

the best thing that ever happened iim ; ie wm ক. একস "

to me was when I left my last job. Meigen oe সী এ

Yes, really! ০০০৭ ৮ oes

I was a desk clerk in an office. But Be পো এত পলি টি

believe me I never liked my job. চি - Le. 8, তা রি .

Nothing can be more boring than im রি হত ay 0 Be a

being stuck in an office all day jag ০ আগে টিতে রা ত

with computers and telephone. [এ  Fuel 8 a শিরিন

So after two years or so, I decided to leave my job though I had a good salary.

Now I'm the owner of a nursery. Planting seeds, budding, grafting, taking care

of saplings, cleaning the flower beds and spending time with trees are different

parts of my full time job. I start work very early. In summer I usually leave home
at 5:30 in the morning, but in winter not until about 7. I've a small hut in my
nursery. There cannot be any more pleasure for me than when I see the moon
from there or walk through the trees in the soft moonlit night. The winter is just
over. So I'm cleaning up the winter flower garden. Now I'm busy producing
more timber and medicinal plants which people will buy from July. Every
season is so different and I love them all. When I compare my present days with
the past, I simply can't understand how I could survive in my previous job. I love

nature. I just love working outside in the open air after all those months in a

stuffy office. Gadgets never attract me and perhaps never will.

I'm not married. I do my own work, even cook my own food. ] try not to depend

on others for the work which I myself can do. Often my friends are annoyed with

me. They say, that I should engage a maid for household chores. They are nothappy ৩

to see me in this rustic life. They are professionals. They earn a lot. Maybe Ss

Unconventional Jobs 115
much more than what I do, but I think I enjoy my work more.

At weekends, I often go to the countryside. Sometimes with my friends,
sometimes alone. I love collecting unknown saplings. I have another hobby. I
love collecting stamps. I have a Russian stamp from the period of Lenin. I don't
watch TV.

The only problem I face is I do not earn enough money in all seasons. The winter
and the monsoon are two busy seasons for me. But it's OK. Maybe I do not earn
enough like many other people around me. But I at least earn enough for my
family, employees, and myself to run a decent life. I must say I'm a very happy
man!

Questions:

1. What is the best thing that ever happened to this man?

2. Why didn't Kamal like his last job?

3. What are the advantages and disadvantages of his present job?

4. When does he earn most money?

5. What attitude of Kamal is reflected in the lines: Maybe I do not earn
much like many other people around me. But I at least earn enough
for my family, employees, and me to run a decent life?

C. Ask and answer questions about Kamal. Use the clues given.
Example:
.২০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০1181119?
Q: Is he married?

A: No, he isnt. He isnt married.
]. ...১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০১১ happy?
2. When...... leave home in summer?
3. What ........ plant after winter?
4. What ....... do at the weekend?
S 5. What ........ collect?
S
N

116 English For Today
D. Look at the following table. The left column shows some positive
aspects of Sayeed Kamals character. Add some more to the list. Also
find out some aspects of Sayeed that you think are unconventional
and write them in the right column.
Good aspects of Sayeed Unconventional aspects of Sayeed
a. simple a. old fashioned
b. diligent b. loner
c. loves nature ০.
d. caring d.
6.
f.
g.
E. Write a paragraph on Sayeed Kamal. Take your cues from D.
F. I must say Im a very happy man!--- Do you agree with Sayeed?
Write why/why not?
২
নে
S

Unconventional Jobs 117
Lesson 2: Weird Jobs Around
A. Look at the following pictures and discuss with your partner what
you see in them.
অন এ পে
ৃ ODD JO ১১০
শালি arr: _
802 সপ এ |
a নার - " a? এ =
B. Read the text and answer the questions that follow.
What type of job do you want to have? Is it a highly paid and high-profile
conventional job most people like? Yes, you can have it. It is matter of your
choice and an important decision that would help you advance in your life. But
have you ever thought of other types of jobs out there--- cool, fun, exciting, even
strange or weird jobs you never knew existed? What are they? Did you ever
wonder who picks up the chewing gum left on a park bench or who assesses
whether a piece of furniture is comfortable enough or who constructs glass eye-
balls or who farms oysters in the middle of the ocean? These are all odd,
unexpected, wild, unconventional, strange or just plain weird jobs and careers.
They are not your traditional career choices, but somebody out there does all
these things, gets paid for it, and enjoys life like anybody else.
There are hundreds of such jobs to take if you want to travel the less taken
S ways of life. You have to decide on several questions:
AQ

118 English For Today

e What companies will recruit/hire me?

e Dolactually get a paycheck?

e What type of education/diploma will I need?

e Can I make a living doing this?
Your answers to these questions will help draw your career roadmap and help
you decide if you are ready to take the challenge. Decide if you want a change.
A lot of strange jobs also allow you to work part-time or towards a freelancer
when it fits your schedule. This way you can get a taste of freedom, a secondary
income, and gain experience at the same time.
Do you have interests beyond writing memos and attending boring meetings? If
so, you may wonder how you can find a strange job. Hobbies are a good place to
start. What do you do for fun? Do you stuff animals, act like Charlie Chaplin, or
make model cars? There are people out there working in fields, making money
off their hobbies. May be they are testing mountaineering equipment, developing
fragrances, or saving sea turtles. And they are getting paid good wages too.
Questions

1. But have you ever thought of other types of jobs out there----? What

does other types of jobs mean here?

2. There are four particular strange and weird jobs mentioned in para one of

the text. Which one of them seems to be most weird to you and why?

3. Before going for an unconventional and strange job the author has
suggested several questions to decide on. Rearrange them, beginning from
what you think is the most important to the least. Add some more
questions to the list that might be important to consider.

4. What are some other strange part-time jobs mentioned in the text?

5. What type of job is referred to by the expression 'writing memos and
attending boring meetings? Do you think the author's observation on the
particular job is justified? Why/Why not?

২
নে
S
N

Unconventional Jobs 119
C. Look at the following dialogue and act it out in pairs.
x : Have you heard of a job like picking up the chewing gums
lelft on a park bench?
Y : Yes, I have. I know one person who does that job.
Xx : What do you think of the job?
Y : Sounds rather funny/odd/crazy/ though. But whats wrong?
You can go for it as long as you enjoy it. And if it pays,
I think its fine.
Now make dialogues on the following:
1. Assessing the comfort of a piece of furniture
2. Farming oysters in the middle of the ocean

D. Arrange a debate in the class in favour of and against strange jobs.

E. ৬৬০7] in pairs. Make a list of adjectives used in the text to describe
strange jobs (at least 10). Are you familiar with all of them? If yes,
use them in your own written sentences. Compare with your partners.
If no, try to guess their meaning from the context. Then
look up a dictionary to get the meanings. Finally, use them in your
own sentences.

F. A number of strange jobs have been mentioned in the text. Do you
know any one around you who does one of the jobs? If yes, write a
paragraph 01) him/her.

If no, first select a job. Then try to imagine who around you
could successfully do that particular job. Write why you think so.

২৩

নে

S

N

120 English For Today
Lesson 3: Floral career
A. Look at the pictures and say what you see in them.
i, টি মরার , ক
ret Pa hale  মূ ্ পুরি) a রি ay <a
B. Work in pairs. Choose a job from the box below but do not tell your
friend. Ask and answer the following Yes/No questions to find out
what the job is.
Architect, taxi driver, dentist, farmer, lawyer, photographer, accountant,
mechanic, soldier, hairdresser, chef, politician, nurse, plumber, florist
Use these questions to help you.
Do you have to...? Did you have to...?
work in shifts do a lot of training
work with people do internship
C. Read the text and answer the questions that follow.
Have you ever thought of a very creative career? Have you dreamt of a rosy
environment full of colour and fragrance? How much would you love it if you
were placed in a store full of flowers the whole day? I'm just going to give you~
some clues about such a job which can also be a business. Q

Unconventional Jobs 121
Yes. Daisies, violets, tulips, marigolds, dahlias, lilies, jasmines, roses and all
those things of beauty can also earn you a living if you handle them
professionally. If you start such a profession you will be called a florist. A
florist's career is a good choice as an unconventional job for many around the
world. Wherever you see eye-catching floral displays, you actually see the
professional performance of a floral designer. Using both real and artificial
flowers with other greeneries, florists prepare flower displays for a variety of
events such as weddings, birthdays, anniversaries, Valentine's day, official
receptions and even funerals. Every flower comes with its distinct colour,
design, value and meaning which flower designers have to know well. There are
conventions and meanings associated with flowers. We know _ that
conventionally roses are meant for romance and marriage anniversaries and
(tulips for) birthdays.
Although formal education or a diploma is not always essential for florists, they
must have good taste, a good eye for colours, shapes and proportion. They have
to have good sense for selecting flowers, ribbons and other accessories to make
beautiful arrangements. Professional florists are knowledgeable about not only
flowers but also designs and techniques. Most florists learn the trade mainly
through apprenticeship in a flower farming job and also by attending formal
floral schools and courses. However, a true passion for flowers and a bit of
aesthetic sense are all that can make a florist's career successful.
Flower designers earn fairly handsome money. But the bonus is that they work
in a fresh and beautiful environment which their clients also enjoy. They work
with flowers all day long in a pleasant and fragrant atmosphere with vivid
colours around.
Questions:

1. How is the career of a florist?

2. What qualities do you need to have for a florists job?

3. How do most florists learn the trade?

4, What is the extra advantage of a florists job?
D. Suppose you have met a florist in a flower shop. Write an imaginary

interview with him/her.
E. Write a short paragraph giving reasons why you like or dont like the
job of a florist.

Unit Ten
Dreams
ae +
After we have studied the unit, we will be able to
e listen for specific information
e participate in conversations and discussions
e understand and narrate problems
e take and give interviews
e complete a grid.
Xo
S
N

Dreams 123
Lesson 1: I Have a Dream
A. Read these texts and say what is common among them.
Hi, Im Moitry Mutsuddi. My Hello! Im Mofakkhar Hasan. I
father is a freedom fighter and live in a slum with my parents
my mother is a teacher. They both and sisters. I know how cruel
dream for a golden Bangladesh poverty can be! My heart
oo. ; bleeds to see the poor,

and inspire me to do something ; ;
on ; . suffering people in my slum.
significant, something positive After I have finished my
for the country. Often I think education, I'll be a. social
what to do to fulfil their worker and fight against social
expectations in future. Finally injustice and poverty.
Ive decided to be a politician Change is the word | believe
and work for my motherland. in to make Bangladesh a

How is it? golden Bengal.
Im Amitabho Kar. When I say My name is Ruth Antara
to my friends that I would like Chowdhury. I believe that a
to be a space traveller, they society cannot be enlightened
laugh. But I really want to be without proper education.
that. If people from other Education lights the candle in
countries can conquer the moon, peoples heart. So I will be a
and roam in the space, why not teacher. Some people appreciate
we? To be honest, I visualise my decision but some people
that one day Im stepping on say teachers are not reverred
Mars from a space shuttle. properly nowaday. I tell them, I
Please wish me the best so that dont care who tell what. I want
my dream comes true. to be a teacher because Im
brilliant. Teachers need to be
creative and innovative.

B. Read the texts again and then work in pairs. Which person do you
think is most like you and why? Write a similar text stating your
own dream.

C. Read this interview between Sathi Begum,a successful student in JSC

৩ and a newspaper reporter, Animesh Roy. The interview is jumbled
Ss up. Read the text and then organise the conversation properly.

124 English For Today
Animesh : So you mean learning from each other?
Sathi: There is no magic behind my success. I just worked hard. I followed
our teachers advice, The more you read, the more you learn.
Im grateful to my teachers and parents for guiding me properly.

Animesh : Well Swati, we are really so proud of you for your brilliant
performance in the JSC exams. Please tell us how you could
achieve this success.

Sathi : Obh....and Im grateful to my school and friends too.

Animesh _ : Thats great!

Sathi: In my school, we had a nice study group. Whenever we had any
problem, we discussed it in our group first. We tried to help each
other. And it always worked. Never forget, two heads are better
than one.

Animesh : I understand why you are grateful to your school but would you

explain how you are grateful to your friends, please?

Sathi : Exactly that!

Animesh : By the way, Swati, what are your dreams for the future?

Sathi : To keep up the success in next exams and make my dreams come true. I
want to be a scientist. Since my childhood I've known that many
people in Bangladesh are under arsenic threat. They are taking
arsenic directly from their drinking water and indirectly from the
crops and vegetables they eat. It's a kind of slow poisoning. People
are helpless. They are suffering from many kinds of diseases.
Therefore, I have a dream to carry out a research on how to get rid of
this problem, using our own recourses and expertise.

Animesh : Wish you luck.

D. Now listen to the Audio and check whether your answer is correct.

E. Work in pairs. Make questions for your partner to know about

his/her dreams and take his/her interview. ৩
নে
S
NX

Dreams 125
Lesson 2: What I Dream to Be
A. Work in groups. Read the following words. How are they related to
dreams?
imagination, emotion, passion, obsessions, strong desire, colour, rosy, future,
mind, brain, plan.
B. Work in groups, and discuss the following questions:
]. Do you consider dreams important for life? Why/Why not?
2. What do you dream at this moment as a student?
3. What, according to you is the dream of Bangladesh at present?
4. Give examples of some dreams that are commonly shared by
Bangladesh as a nation.
5. Do you think the world has any common dream? What is that?
C. Listen to the Audio. Three persons are telling about their dreams.
Take notes in the following grid to show what they plan to do and
what they dont want to do.
Ce
টি [10
[10
 চাহ

শব
S
AN

126 English For Today
1). 11561) to the texts again and check (.//x) the statements.
1. Masum Billah desires to study agriculture as his teacher suggests
him to do that.
2. If Masum qualifies, he will get admitted to a university in his
rural area.
3. Catherines mother died in a doctors hand.
4. If Catherines family had brought a trained nurse, her mother might
have survived.
5. If Najmun Sultana came a few months ago, Nirmal could take
admission to a foreign University.
6. If Nirmals dreams come true, his near and dear ones will be more
conscious about their rights.
E. Nowmake sentences from the following substitution table.
If Nirmal she will serve her community.
If Najmun_ | called a trained medical person she could save her mothers life.
Sultana came to Nirmals class a few days ago| he will be a farmers friend.
they could learn more.
F. Work in pairs and make sentences reflecting your own life using if
clauses as in the table above.
G. Write a composition about an event in your life that has inspired
you to have adream. Then briefly describe the dream. Make
predictions and possibilities.
২
নে
S
N

Dreams 127

Lesson 3: They Had Dreams (Part-1)

A. Shanta was chatting with one of her foreign friends Jenny. Read

the dialogue and tell what the subject of their conversation is.

Jenny : Shanta, whats your dream for the future?

Shanta : To be a good human being first and then work for my countryno
matter whether I become a social worker, an artist, or a professional.

Jenny :Wow!I really appreciate your thought! By the way, Shanta, does

anyone inspire you in your dreams?

Shanta : Certainly. I'm always influenced by the great personalities in our coun-
try and abroad. Whenever I read the biography of great people, I try to
understand how their dreams helped them to be what they have
been.

Jenny : Would you please tell me about some of your favourite dreamers?

Shanta : Sure! Read the following texts to know about some dreamers

in my country. They are my icons as well.

B. Read the text and complete the tasks C and D.

Pritilata Waddedar was born in Chattogram on 5

May 1911. She was a meritorious student at Dr

Khastagir Government Girls' School in

Chattogram and Eden College, Dhaka. She

graduated in philosophy with distinction from

Bethune College in Kolkata. In her college days, .

Pritilata was an activist in the anti-British . oy

movement. All through her life, she dreamt of two ie ১. J;

things: a society without gender discrimination, oy টি.

and her motherland free from British colonial rule. WY

So, she decided to fight against the British rule. a

Soon after, Pritilata became the head teacher of Nandankanon Aparna Charan

এ School in Chattogram. Gradually, she involved herself in Surja Sen's armed
S
AN

128 English For Today
resistance movement. Surja Sen was a famous anti-British movement organiser
and revolutionary activist in Chattogram area at that time. In 1932, Surja Sen
planned an attack on the Pahartali European ine ERT
Club. The club was well-known for its ২. এ, _
notorious sign at its entrance: Dogs and eg? সা...
Indians not allowed. Surja Sen assigned পনি = wy is
Pritilata to lead a team of 10-12 men to attack
the Club. The raid was successful but Pritilata,  TCC:
dressed as a man, failed to get out of the Club. Pahartali European Club
She committed suicide by taking potassitum cyanide to avoid arrest. She proved
that women can work like men. She also proved that women too needed to be
prepared to sacrifice their lives for freedom from the British colonial rule. Her
dream finally came true. The British rule came to an end in 1947 though she
couldn't see it during her lifetime.
C. Read the words in Column A and match them with the meanings in Column B.
Column A | CoummB 7
২১
=

Dreams 129
D. Now answer the questions.
1. Where did Pritilata fight?
2. When did she fight?
3. Why did she fight?
4. What was Pritilatas profession?
5. What do you learn from Pritilatas life?
E. Now, make questions from the substitution table and match the answers.
One is done for you.
When she graduate in? On 5 May 1911.
Where Pritilata born? In Chattogram
What | was | assigned Pritilata to attack Philosophy.
Why | did | the Club? To fight against the British rule.
What Pritilata die? For its notorious signDogs and
Who the Pahartali European Club | Indians not allowed.
How famous for? Surja Sen.
she born? She committed suicide by taking
potassium cyanide.

130 English For Today
Lesson 4: They Had Dreams (Part 2)
A. Look at the picture. He is a great son of our country. Who is he?
What do you know about him?
B. 13990 the text.
Zahir Raihan was one of the most talented film
makers in Bangladesh. He was born on 19 August oho
1935 in the village Majupur in Feni district. He was N 7
an active worker of the Language Movement. He was * ২,
one of the ten students to go out in a procession on 21 . \
February 1952 despite a ban on such activities imposed 5 ao on . .
by the authorities. As a result, he and many others % tH ৬
were arrested and taken to prison. Raihan was also Wa 218১,
present at the historical meeting of Amtala on 21 February ~ 7
1952. He also took part in the mass movement in ১73
1969. In 1971, he joined the Liberation War.
All through his life, Zahir Raihan dreamt of a democratic society, a society that
would ensure freedom of speech. He had many dreams about our film industry
too. He made a legendary film Jibon Theke Neya based on the Language
Movement of 1952. It was a protest against the autocratic government then
ruling our country. The family portrayed in that film symbolically represented
East Pakistan. The family was ruled by an autocrat who had to go to prison for
her conspiracy. During the Liberation War in 1971, this film was shown outside
Bangladesh. Celebrated film makers like Satyajit Ray, Mrinal Sen, and Ritwik
Ghatak appreciated the film. Raihan gave all the money the film made to the
Freedom Fighters trust. Besides, his great documentary on Pakistani atrocities,
Stop Genocide, helped create world sentiment in favour of our liberation war.
On 30 December 1971, someone informed Raihan about an address somewhere
at Mirpur where he might find his brother, the famous writer Shahidullah Kaiser,
who had gone missing from 14 December 1971. Kaiser was captured and killed
by the Pakistani army and the local collaborators during the last days of the war.
Accordingly, Raihan left home to get his brother back but he never returned.
Zahir Raihans dream was fulfilled. But it's a pity that this dreamer could not
live to see his dream come true. 8

Dreams 13]
C. Use appropriate information from the text above to complete the grid.
Zahir Raihan
participated in | famous as | best movie based | missing | his dream
document | on language | since
ary movement
D. Read the following sentences and complete them.
1. Zahir Rathan is famous as .....০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৭
2. Raihan was imprisoned because .....,১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০,
3. He participated in ,...১.০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৮ ANG Lecce eee
4. Jibon Theke Neva 5910010011995....,,,.,১১০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৩,
5. He donated ...........,.০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০২০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৩,
6. He worked to organise .....,.১০১১০০০০০১০০০০০০০১১০০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০০০০০0%
his great documentary Stop Genocide.
7, His disappearance 19 a 57108. .......১-০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ ০
E. Work in pairs. Discuss.
1. Why is Zahir Raithan considered a freedom fighter though he was a film
maker?
2. How does the title of the lesson fit the story of Zahir Raihan?
২৩
হা
নব

Unit Eleven
Reading from English Literature
pee 7 i =m
mo এ = ee
১. | [pay oe 4
Learning outcomes
After we have studied the unit, we will be able to
e recognize and use English sounds, stress, and intonation
e understand and enjoy stories and other texts
e interpret, evaluate, and summarise literary texts.
২
Ss
NX

Reading from English Literature 133
Lesson 1: Books
A. Ask and answer these questions in pairs.
1. | Do you read any books other than your school textbooks?
2. If yes, what kinds of books do you read? (stories, poems, etc)
3. Now write one or two reasons why you read those books and
share with your partner.
B. Read the poem.
Books
- Eleanor Farjeon
What worlds of wonder are our books!
As one opens them and looks,
New ideas and people rise
In our fancies and our eyes.
The room we sit in melts away,
And we find ourselves at play
With some one who, before the end,
May become our chosen friend.
Or we sail along the page . :
To some other land or age.
Heres our body in the chair, রর
But our mind is over there. F
Each book is a magic box, '
Which with a touch a child unlocks.
In between their outside covers ১১০
Books hold all things for their lovers. - ,
২১
=

134 English For Today
C. Answer that following questions.
1. What does the poet say about the good things that reading a book can
do to you?
2. What does the poet compare book to in the opening lines of the poem?
3. How does the poem describe the way books "fly" to us?
4. According to the poem, how do books provide comfort or companionship?
5. Do you agree with the poet's portrayal of books as magical and timeless?
Why or why not?
Lesson 2: Two Mothers Remembered
A. Read the poem and answer the following questions
Two Mothers Remembered
- Joann Snow Duncanson
I had two Mothers  two Mothers I claim x
Two different people, yet with the same name. এ
Two separate women, diverse by design,
But I loved them both because they were mine. . <
The first was the Mother who carried me here,
Gave birth and nurtured and launched my career. 4
She was the one whose features I bear,
Complete with the facial expressions I wear. ae
She gave me her love, which follows me yet, .
Along with the examples in life she set.
As I got older, she somehow younger grew,
And wed laugh as just Mothers and daughters do.
But then came the time that her mind clouded so,
And I sensed that the Mother I knew would soon go.
So quickly she changed and turned into the other,
A stranger who dressed in the clothes of my Mother.
Oh, she looked the same, at least at arms length,
But now she was the child and I was her strength. ৩
Wed come full circle, we women three, Ss

Reading from English Literature 135
My mother the first, the second and me.
And if my own children should come to a day,
When a new Mother comes and the old goes away,
I'd ask of them nothing that I didnt do.
Love both of your Mothers as both have loved you.
Questions
Answer the following questions:
1. How are the two mothers different from each other?
2. How are they the same?
3. What did the first mother do to the speaker?
4. Who was the speakers second mother? Describe her briefly.
5. What would be the speakers advice to her own children?
6. Who are the three women referred to in the poem? Briefly describe
them.
7. What should children do to their mother and why?
8. Do you like this poem? Why?
Lesson 3: The Sands of Dee
A. Listen to the poem. Read it aloud in groups.
The Sands of Dee
- Charles Kingsley
|
S
নে

136 English For Today
O Mary, go and call the cattle home,
And call the cattle home,
And call the cattle home
Across the sands of Dee!
The western wind was wild and dank with foam,
And all alone went she.
The western tide crept up along the sand,
And oer and oer the sand,
And round and round the sand,
As far as eye could see.
The rolling mist came down and hid the land
And never home came she.
Oh! Is it weed, or fish, or floating hair,
A tress of golden hair,
A drowned maidens hair
Above the nets at sea?
Was never salmon yet that shone so fair
Among the stakes of Dee
They rowed her in across the rolling foam,
The cruel crawling foam,
The cruel hungry foam,
To her grave beside the sea:
But still the boatmen hear her call the cattle home
Across the sands of Dee.
S
co

Reading from English Literature 137
B. 10559] these questions.

1. What was the weather like when Mary went to bring the cattle home?

2. Look at some words, phrases and sentences that have been repeated
several times. Explain why the poet has done that.

3. How has the poet described the sea?

4. Narrate the story of Mary in your own words.

5. Suppose you were walking on the shore with a couple of your
friends while Mary was drowning. Describe what you would have
done.

Lesson 4: Time, You Old Gipsy Man
A. Read and answer the following questions.

]. Have you ever seen a gipsy? If yes, where?

2. Do gipsies live in our country?

3. In what ways are they different from the general people?

B.  Nowread the poem and answer the questions that follow.
Time, You Old Gipsy Man
- Ralph Hodgson
Time, you old gipsy man,
Will you not stay,
Put up your caravan
Just for a day?
All things IIl give you,
Will you be my guest?
Bells for your jennet
Of silver the best,
Goldsmiths shall beat you
A great golden ring,

138 English For Today
Peacocks shall bow to you,
Little boys sing,
Oh, and sweet girls will
Festoon you with may.
Time, you old gipsy,
Why hasten away?
Last week in Babylon,
Last night in Rome,
Morning, and in the crush
Under Pauls dome;
Under Pauls dial
You tighten your rein
Only a moment
And off once again;
Off to some city
Now blind in the womb,
Off to another
Ere thats in the tomb.
Time, you old gipsy man,
Will you not stay,
Put up your caravan
Just for a day?
Questions:
1. Why does the poet call time an old gipsy man?
2. Make a list of things the poet will offer time if it stays just for a day.
3. What else can you offer time if it stays for a day?
4. What does the poem imply about the human struggle to control or
delay Time?
5. Is the poem's message about Time ultimately pessimistic or realistic? ২
Discuss. নি

Reading from English Literature 139

Lesson 5: Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening

A. Ask and answer these questions.

1. Do you enjoy natural beauty like flowers, trees, woods, hills, etc.?
2. Have you ever been to a place where you enjoyed such beauty? If
yes, briefly describe it.

B. Read the poem and say how the words in each stanza rhyme. For example,
in stanza 1 know (line 1) though (line 2) and snow (line 4) rhyme with each
other.

Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening
- Robert Frost

Whose woods these are I think I know.

His house is in the village though;

He will not see me stopping here

To watch his woods fill up with snow.

My little horse must think it queer

To stop without a farmhouse near

Between the woods and frozen lake

The darkest evening of the year.

He gives his harness bells a shake

To ask if there is some mistake.

The only other sounds the sweep

Of easy wind and downy flake.

The woods are lovely, dark and deep.

But I have promises to keep,

And miles to go before I sleep,

And miles to go before I sleep.

C. Answer the following questions.

1. Where do you think the poet is going? Why is he going there?

2. Why does the speaker stop by the woods on a snowy evening?
S 3. What does the speaker mean when he says, "The woods are lovely,
ও dark and deep"?

140 English For Today
4. Guess what promise the poet had to keep before he would sleep.
Why did the poet stop by the woods though it was dark and he
was alone?
5. Is the poem's ending hopeful or resigned? Discuss your interpretation.
6. Write an imaginary dialogue between the poet and his horse.
Lesson 6: The Purple Jar (Part-1)
A. Think about the following situation.
Suppose your mother/father has given you some money to spend on
anything you like in a fair.Going round the fair, you have shortlisted the
following items:
(a) a beautiful decorative wooden horse
(b)  acolourful shirt/kamiz of latest fashion
(c) a box of delicious chocolates for your family
(d) agolden pen---a gift for your best friend
But you have money enough to buy only one thing.
Write a paragraph about what you will buy and why.
B. Nowread the story and answer the questions that follow.
Rosamond, a little girl about seven years old, was walking with her
mother in the streets of London. As she passed along she looked in at the
windows of several shops, and saw a great variety of things. She wanted
to stop to look at them and buy them all, without knowing their uses or
even without knowing their names.
At first they stopped at a milliners shop. The windows of the shop
were decorated with ribbons, lace and festoons of artificial flowers.
Oh, Mamma, what beautiful roses! Wont you buy some of them?
No, my dear.
Why?
Because I dont want them. They are not real flowers.
They went a little further and came to a jewellers shop. In it were a great
many pretty, bright ornaments of little value, set beautifully behind the ৩
N
glass. =

Reading from English Literature 141
Mamma, will you buy some of these? aff e
Which of them, Rosamond? Ps ae ak
Which? I dont know which. Look at those earrings, rs,
that necklace, those pendants! Any of them will do, hd
they are so pretty!

Yes, they are all pretty, but of what use would _ .
they be to me? ee
T am sure, Mamma, you could find some use + সা
if you only bought them first. এ
০ সহ
But I would rather find out the use first.
Though a little disheartened, Rosamond kept on looking at the shops and tried to
persuade her mother to buy this or that.
Mamma, buckles are very useful things. Please buy some.
T have a pair of buckles. I dont need any now. So saying her mother walked
on.
Questions:
1. Make a list of things Rosamond wanted to buy.
2. How did the milliners shop look like?
3. What can you see in a jewellers shop in a town/city in Bangladesh,
which you know well?
Lesson 7: The Purple Jar (Part-2)
A. Read more of the story.
This time Rosamond was really disappointed as her mother wanted
nothing. However, while they were passing by a chemist's shop, she saw
some jars---blue, green, red, yellow and purple---and she seemed to have
a fascination for a purple jar. But her mother answered as before, "Of
g what use would they be to me, Rosamond?"
AN

142 English For Today

Oh, Mamma, I would use it for a flower pot.

But you have a flower pot and the jar you are dying for buying is nota
flower pot.

Yet, Mamma, I like it so much ...!

Then suddenly she cried, Ouch! A stone, mamma, a stone has got in my
shoe. It hurts!

Oh! How did it get there?

See, theres a hole in my shoe, Mamma. In fact, my shoes are quite worn
out. Would you be so good as to buy me another pair?

But, Rosamond, I havent got money enough to buy shoes, jars, jewellary,
buckles and all that you wish to buy.

Rosamond became sad again. Her mind flashed back to all those beautiful

things she had seen that morning.

But, Mamma, I like the purple jar very much. And now my foot hurts.
Could you buy me only these two things --- the jar anda pair of shoes,
please?

No, Rosamond, you can buy only one thing. However, you may buy the
other thing next month. And you have to decide which one you would
like to buy now.

T need the shoes badly, Rosamond began to argue with herself, but my
heart is in that beautiful jar.

Then looking at her shoes, she told her mother, These shoes are not so

bad, except for the hole in one. I think I can make them last till the end

of the month, cant I? Dont you think so, Mamma?

এ] want you to think for yourself, dear.

Okay, if you please, I would like to have the purple jar.

Very well, you will have it.

s
N

Reading from English Literature 143
B. _ Tick the best answer.

1. Which is the correct statement?
a. Rosamond saw the chemists shop from a distance.
b. She liked the jars of all the colours equally.
০. She had a special liking for a jar of a particular colour.
d. Her mother found some use of the purple jar.

2. Rosamond wanted to buy
a. all the jars. b.  the purple jar.
c. a flower pot. d. auseful pot.

3. The money Rosamonds mother has can buy only
a. one thing. b. _ two things.
c. three things. d. four things.

4. Why did Rosamond persuade her mother to buy her a pair of shoes?
Because
a. her shoes had become old and ugly.
b. she had no money to buy the purple jar.
Cc. the shoes in the shop were very beautiful.
d. a stone got in her shoe and was hurting her.

5. What made Rosamond finally decide to buy the purple jar?
a. the beautiful size of the jar
b. her mothers inability to buy the shoes
০. her shoes being not so bad
d. the beautiful colour of the jar

Lesson 8: The Purple Jar (Part-3)

A. Read the last part of the story to see what happened to Rosamonds

beautiful purple jar.

Rosamond and her mother were going back to the chemist's shop. As they were
৩ walking, Rosamond had to stop once again to take another stone out of the
২২. broken shoe, and she often limped with pain.

AN

144 English For Today
When they got back to the shop, Rosamond's mother asked her to carefully
examine the jar before she bought it. But Rosamond was so excited that she
bought it even without looking at what was inside the jar.
Happily she came back home with her mother. Then Rosamond quickly brought
some flowers from the garden and was going to put them into the jar. But as soon
as she took the top off, she saw something dark inside, which gave off an
unpleasant smell.
What is it, Mamma? I didnt want this black thing and the terrible smell.
Nor did I, my dear.
But what shall I do with it?
That I cant tell.
Okay, Mamma, I must pour it out and fill the jar with fresh water.
Then she made the jar empty. But to her great disappointment, she found that it
was no longer a purple jar --- it was a plain white glass jar. With its coloured
water gone, the jar did no longer look beautiful.
Rosamond cried with tears of disappointment in her eyes. She also cried for her
folly. Every day her shoes grew worse and worse, and she could neither run,
dance, jump, nor go shopping with her mother.
Thus Rosamond suffered for a whole month and learned a lesson the hard
way. She hoped that she would be wiser in future.
Adapted from The Purple Jar by Maria Edgeworth
B. 055০7 these questions.

1. Why didnt Rosamond examine the jar before buying it?

2. What did she take the jar for?

3. How did she come to know that the purple jar was in fact a plain

white glass jar?
4. Describe her sufferings and disappointments for buying the purple
jat. a
AN

Reading from English Literature 145
C. 1২990 all the three parts of the story again and answer these questions.
1. How did Rosamond try to persuade her mother to buy all the pretty

things she saw in the shops?

2. How did her mother try to stop Rosamond from buying all the things
she wanted to buy?

3. Write two paragraphs-one about Rosamond and the other about her
mother. Use words and phrases from the box below, which are
appropriate for each character. You can also use your own words
and phrases.

a seven year old girl, use, disappointed, purple, worse, lesson,
sufferings, artificial, ornaments, pretty, liking, worn out, persuade,
beautiful roses, disheartened, enough, badly, examine, unpleasant
smell, stupidity, emotional, practical, decide, limped
Lesson 9: A Pound of Flesh
A. Look at the picture and ask and answer the
questions.
1. | What do you see? এ 8
; ub
2. What are the three persons doing? . Mis A
3. What type of clothes are they wearing? " ay শি রা
4. Are you familiar with such clothes? না রা এ মা ta
5... Who wears such clothes? ii iit , fe i .
6. | Mention which clothes of our country are close Pe ary টি
to the ones the men are wearing in the picture? মি
B. Read the text.
Once upon a time in Venice, Italy, there was a very rich merchant named
Antonio. He had many ships that sailed in the sea. His ships carried different
types of merchandise to other countries. He sold those goods there. He bought
spices and other valuables from foreign countries and sold them in Venice.

146 English For Today

Antonio was a good and kind man. He always helped the poor. The people of

Venice loved him very much for his honesty and kindness.

Antonio had a close friend named Bassanio. He was a handsome young man and

was born in a noble family. Bassanio liked to live a very luxurious life. He loved

grandeur and style. He spent more money than he earned. As a result, he was

very often short of money. In such situations, Bassanio would go to his best

friend Antonio for help. Antonio would help him with cash.

It so happened that Bassanio fell in love with a wealthy lady named Portia. Portia

was known not only for her beauty but also for her wisdom. She was soft

towards Bassanio too. He wanted to visit Portia in a grand manner but he did not

have any money. So he went to Antonio.

Bassanio said, "Dear friend Antonio, I am in great need of some money. I would

like to visit Portia at Belmont, grandly dressed and with many servants. But I

don't have any money right now. Please help me to fulfill my intention."

Antonio said, This is not a problem, my friend. How much do you need?

Three thousand ducats [Venetian currency] will do.

T dont have that much money with

me now as all my ships have gone out = দা 4

in the sea with merchandise. But dont ওটি আন [৭ oe

worry, my friend, 111 arrange three . of vf পন

thousand ducats for you. #3 ~ oF পর

So he decided to borrow the sum! . a me nae রণ

from a moneylender named Shylock. a Tee toe. rs রাশ

Shylock was a very crooked man. q i sh ২... ক

Antonio and Shylock hated each? 1 i : pr

other. Shylock used to lend money | : BaD - Ny  ty ball

with high interest. He would even! উর #iaminanes ca

send the debtor to prison if the latter ~~ .

failed to pay his debt. On the

contrary, Antonio used to lend money to help those who needed it and

would not charge any interest.

Shylock agreed to lend him money but on one condition. If he failed to repay the

money in three month's time, he would pay a penalty. Shylock would cut a

pound of flesh from any part of Antonio's body. 
Qo
N

Reading from English Literature 147
Antonio willingly agreed, thinking that his ships would soon return with all the
rich merchandise and he could easily return the money to Shylock by selling
them. Shylock made Antonio sign a bond before giving him the money. Antonio
took the money and gave it to Bassanio.
C. True or False? If false, give the correct information.
1. Bassanio was a very rich man.
2. Bassanio and Antonio hated each other.
3. Antonio went to Shylock to borrow some money.
4. Shylock happily gave Antonio the money he asked for.
5. Antonio needed the money to bring his merchandise.
D. Read the text in B again and answer the following questions.
1. Why was Bassanio short of money all the time?
2. Why did he go to Antonio?
3. Why did Antonio go to Shylock?
4. Why did Shylock get a bond signed by Antonio?
5. What was written in the bond?
Lesson 10: The Three Caskets
A. Look at the picture and discuss it in pairs.
২% Ge NB
B. Read the text and answer the questions that follow.
Bassanio went to Belmont to visit Portia grandly dressed, with many servants.
Portia's father had died lately. Before his death he had thought of an unusual plan
to find a good husband for his daughter. He wanted a man to marry Portia for
herself and not for her wealth. He had three caskets made, one of gold, one of
৩ silver and one of lead. One of the caskets had Portia's portrait in it. The suitor
২ who would first choose the casket with the portrait would marry her.
AN

148 English For Today
The first one to try was the prince of Morocco. He
thought that silver and lead are poor metals. It is the .
casket made of precious metal that can hold the = |
precious picture. So he chose the gold casket. But all ৬ পল
he found was a picture of a skull with a message that ic : fe a
said, All that glitters is not gold. The prince was i F
very sad and went back home. Then came the prince জী Tae i]
of Spain. He looked at the silver casket for a long ছু ১: "eh
time. On it was written, He who chooses me will J  . in
get what he deserves. The prince had a very high . এ  র্
opinion about himself. He thought that he deserved = sa 
the best. He therefore chose the silver casket and ase
opened it. Inside the casket he found the picture of a - J
blinking fool. He was very disappointed and
offended. He immediately rode away.
Then it was Bassanio's tum. He looked at the caskets for a long time. He thought,
"Appearances are often misleading. Bad men appear good and they hide their
inner ugliness under fine clothes." So he chose the plain looking lead casket. On
opening the casket, he found the portrait of Portia inside.
Bassanio and Portia got married. There was great joy at Belmont and the newly
married couple were spending their time happily.
But soon their happiness turned into sorrow by a piece of news. A messenger
came with a letter from Antonio. The letter said, "Dear friend Bassanio, all my
ships have been lost at sea. I cannot pay the money I owe to Shylock. So I have
to pay the penalty. Dear friend, come and see me if possible. I would like to see
you once before I die." Bassanio quickly left for Venice.
Questions:
1. Why did Portias father make such a strange plan?
2. Write what you know of the three caskets.
3. How many people attempted to choose the right casket? What
was the result?
4. Who succeeded to marry Portia? Why/How?
5. Why did the joyous mood at Belmont turn sad? ৩
Q
S
NX

Reading from English Literature 149
Lesson 11: The Trial
A. Read the text and answer the questions that follow.
When Bassanio reached Venice, Antonio was already in the court of justice.
They were waiting for the trial to begin. The Duke entered the courtroom, took
his seat and the trial began. The Duke requested Shylock to be merciful and not
to claim his pound of flesh. But Shylock would not listen to him. Bassanio
offered him twice the amount of money that Shylock lent Antonio but Shylock
did not accept it. He said, "I claim my pound of flesh. The law is on my side.
Antonio must pay the penalty written in the bond."
The Duk t ] that h =? oe "
e Duke was extremely sorry at he নিক Bee . | ;
could do nothing to help Antonio. The law a ai i At a
was on Shylocks side and the law must be ক i - a
abided. The Duke feared that although the gy i = A |
wisest lawyer in Venice was coming to ক: , রা
a
speak in defense of Antonio, he would & . il
not be able to save the merchant. Soon a ae " 4) 1234
young clerk entered the courtroom with a ~ mm
letter from that lawyer. The lawyer was ill and would not be able to come to the
court.
He requested the Duke to let his young friend, Doctor Balthazar, defend
Antonio. The Duke gave his permission, and Doctor Balthazar entered the
courtroom. He looked very young, and the Duke doubted if the wisdom of the
young lawyer could save Antonio. This young lawyer was no other than Portia
in disguise and the young clerk was her friend, who was also in disguise.
Portia begged Shylock to be merciful and told him how God bestows mercy to
those who are merciful themselves.
"Mercy" Portia said, "brings a blessing to him who shows it and to him who
receives it. All of us pray to God for mercy. But God will only have mercy on us
if we have mercy on others."
Shylock paid no heed to Portia. All he wanted was his pound of flesh.
Portia asked, "Can't Antonio pay the debt?"

S Bassanio cried, Yes, he can pay it, and even more. ... Even I can pay ten

150 English For Today
times the sum my friend borrowed from Shylock.
Wont you take the money, Shylock? Portia asked.

No, I demand the lawful penalty. Give me my pound of flesh.
Let me see the bond Shylock, said Portia.
Shylock handed the bond to her. She read it with great attention and then said,
"You are right Shylock. The law is on your side. You can claim the flesh. But I
would request you one more time to accept the sum Bassanio is offering you, and
let me tear up the bond." But Shylock would not give up his claim. Portia then
turned towards Antonio and said, Get ready Antonio for Shylock to cut his
pound of flesh. The law gives it to him.
Shylock was filled with joy on hearing what Portia said. He began to praise
Portia in disguise, for her wisdom and righteousness. He cried out, "Oh noble
judge! Oh excellent young man, you are a second Daniel, who has come to this
earth."
Portia urged Shylock to cut the pound of flesh he demanded. Delighted, Shylock
walked towards Antonio with a knife in hand. He told Antonio to uncover his
chest. But as he was about to cut Antonio's flesh, Portia stopped him. She cried
out, Wait a second, Shylock! Never forget - there is no mention of blood in the
bond. Therefore, you cannot shed a single drop of blood while you cut your
pound of flesh; or else you pay the penalty. And the penalty is, the state will take
your property from you. You lose everything that you have now, Shylock."
Shylock understood it was not possible for him to cut a pound of flesh without
shedding blood. He was defeated by the wise lawyer. He hung his head and
without another word left the courtroom. Thus Antonio's life was saved.
Lessons 9, 10 & 11 are adapted from The Merchant of Venice by
William Shakespeare.
Questions:

1. Who was Portia? What do you know about her?

2. What did Portia say regarding mercy?

3. How did Portia save Antonios life?

4. Sketch the character of Antonio.

5. How do you evaluate the character of Shylock? রর

=

Unit Twelve
Roots
cia
fe re
Aes পা এ ৮
fs Paes a Fa; দু নর
টা Ree Eg eT
' রত বি তি Beles ৯
8৯০৪৭ ০৫ Fete aa 0৫
Learning outcomes
After we have studied the unit, we will able to

 participate in conversations and debates

e exchange personal information

e narrate incidents and events in a logical sequence

e present own ideas, give and ask for information

e write letters to newspapers

e lodge complaint

e present information in a chart.
<a)
শব
S
N

152 English For Today
Lesson 1: My Roots
A. How do you feel looking at the photo?
a ee
. oF . " he Je নি
 , , , - i at রি a 24,  ৬ 2 
I 2 a ae! 1 রা AL:  .
: 3 . মি f ৯০০ ; ; নি, = . aad a. a
fd 2 পিসি ও
he 7. Ye এ ২ দু! 
০ -7T 1 - a ৮ ' A i a? a - !  নিন
People rush to their roots on different occasions
B. 1২০90 the following text.
Eid is the main religious festival of the Muslims in Bangladesh. Eid means
happiness. Eveyone wants to share this happiness with near and dear ones. So
most of the people, who are living outside their homes for different reasons have
a strong desire to get back home during the Eid vacation. As a result, there is a
mad rush to board buses, trains, or launches for going home. This often causes
transport accidents that take away many lives. However, these cannot stop
people from going home to meet their family, in-laws, or friends. What makes
people rush for their homes in spite of serious hazards? This is nothing but
peoples desire to return to the roots. Do human beings have roots like the trees?
The answer is 15951 but unlike the roots of the trees they are invisible,
they lie in our minds. It's these roots that make a bond between us and family ৩
নে
S
AQ

Roots 153
members, in-laws, friends, neighbours or even between us and the land where
we were born and grow up. In that sense our families, our land of birth, relatives,
our culture, traditions, or surroundings are our roots. And wherever we stay, we
feel the power of our roots. It's our roots that develop our identity making us
what we are. When we lose that bond, we become rootless. Human beings who
do not have any roots are a non-entity. In other words, they do not have an
identity. They don't know where they are from, and/or where they are heading
to. This often makes them feel empty and lost.
C. 1২০90 the text in the speech bubbles. Make questions based on the
bubbles and then compare them in pairs.
Eid is the main Eid means
religious festival of happiness.
the Muslims in
Bangladesh.
Ss 
৫7 ০
In that sense our families,
our land of birth, relatives, Its our roots
our culture, traditions, or that develop our
surroundings are our . . .
identity making us
roots.
what we are.
০9 SO

154 English For Today
D. Fill in the grid with appropriate information from the text above.
The problems of a rootless person
E. ৬৬০1] in pairs. Talk about these questions.
1. Do you have any root other than the place where you are living now? If
yes, where is it and who live there? If not, why not?
2. How do you label your roots?
I have my roots in
[18 remote rural village [_] a village [_]a semi-urban area (upazila)
[Ja smalltown [1_] a midsize 01697] asuburb [_] acity
3. Do you feel any attraction for your roots?
4. How do you nourish your roots?
5. What, according to you, are the reasons why people become rootless?
F. Make a classroom survey and present in a chart the types of roots
your classmates have.
XO
S
N

Roots 155
Lesson 2: My Roots -2
A. Read the following remarks and find out who is like you.
I simply just cant bear the people who dont have any respect for their roots.
 Haridas Soren
We have a moderately big house in a town but we frequently go to our village
home as well. I always feel so at home when I visit my village and stay with
my near ones.
Bidisha Yasmin
I live in a small apartment with my mom, dad, and my little sister. Most of my
relatives live in a village. I seldom go over there as I dont like village life.
 Ifti Mahmud
Some people are so eager to leave their own homes, friends, and everything
behind only to be a part of the city life. They are not for me.
 Antara Gomes
To be frank, I dont get used to visiting my relatives in the village.
 Jhilik Ahsan
I live in a city but I never forget my parents are from a tiny but beautiful village.
I know I have my roots there and Im so proud of that.
 Anupom Chakma
I just cant stand the people who have grown up in the village but forget it once
they are out from there.
 Debashish Biswash
Now make your own statement about your roots.
: ১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০২০০০০০০০০০০০১০০২০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০২০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০০২০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০,

156 English For Today

B. Read the above statements of different in A people again and make
two listsone stating what they like and the other stating their dislikes.

C. Do you agree/disagree with their statements? Write down why.

D. 1২680 the following text.

Mainul Islam is a qualified farmer in Naogaon. Mr.Islam was very brilliant as a

student. He took his higher education from Bangladesh Agricultural University

in Mymensingh. He then came back home and started advanced farming. He has

two other brothers who are graduates in different disciplines. The specialty of

the Islam family is that they all are living in their village and all are renowned in

their own fields. Mr. Islams younger brother, who is a Rajshahi University

graduate, is a science teacher in a local school. His youngest brother is a social

science graduate who likes to start a local NGO to work for this area. When
asked "What makes you decide to stay here in this village?" Mr Islam smiled and

said, "Look, it's true that we could leave this village for city life. I could be

banker or my brothers could be bureaucrats. But it didn't attract us. We are sons

of this soil. Yes, we have education but does education prepare a person only to

be an officer? Don't we have any obligation to the soil that has made us what we

are?" He also added that not every educated individual should be a job seeker.

He added that since his discipline was agriculture, after his education he took the

occupation of a farmer. In response to a question whether they had any

frustration living in a village, he confirmed that they were indeed very pleased

with their life. He said, "I work in my own farm, stay with my family members,

pass time with my old friends, and sleep at my own home. All these count a lot."

Mr. Islam is right. Many people go to cities and forget or loosen their roots

knowingly or unknowingly. Mr Islam and his brothers are greatthey havent

forgotten their roots. They not only stuck to their own roots, they have been
torch bearers for others to be respectful of their roots.

E. Work in pairs. If you are given a chance to meet Mr. Islam, what
questions would you ask him? Make both wh-questions and yes/no
questions.

২
নে
S
NX

Roots 157
F. Read the statements in columns A and B. Then match them to
make complete sentences.
1. Mr. Islam a. if anyone has education she/he
2. The specialty of Islam's brothers is must have a job. .
b. has multi- faceted opportunities.
3. Mr. Islam never believes that
c. graduated from Bangladesh
4. Mr.Islam also believes Agricultural University.
5. Staying with the roots d. in the duty toward roots.
e. that city life couldnt attract them.
G. 100 you like Mr. Islam? Why/ Why not? Write down some reasons in
favour of your opinion and share with your partner.
Lesson 3: The Return of the Native
A. Read the following text.
Michael Madhusudan Dutt, was a celebrated 19" century Bangalee poet and
dramatist. He was born in Sagordari on the bank of the Kopotaksho River, a
village in Keshabpur Upazila under Jashore district.
From an early age, Michael aspired to be an Englishman in form and manner.
Though he was born in a sophisticated Hindu family, he converted to
Christianity as a young man, much to the ire of his family, and adopted the
first name Michael. In his childhood, he was
recognised by his teachers as a precious child with a
gift of literary talent. His early exposure to English
education and European literature at home and his
college inspired him to imitate the English in taste,
manners and intellect. \
Since his adolescence, he started believing that he was |
born on the wrong side of the planet, and that his
society was unable to appreciate his talent. He also
৩ _ believed that the West would be more receptive to his
S creative genius.

158 English For Today
Madhusudan was an ardent follower of the famous English poet Lord Byron. So
after adopting Christianity, he went to Europe and started composing poems and
plays in English. They showed his higher level of intellectual ability. However,
he failed to gain the right appreciation. To his utter frustration he found that he
was not esteemed as a native writer of English literature. Out of his frustration,
he composed a sonnet in Bangla "Kopotaksha Nad" which earned him huge
reputation in Bangla. Gradually he could realise that his true identity lay in
Bengal and he was a sojourner in Europe. Afterwards, he regretted his fascination
for England and the West. He came back to Bengal and devoted himself to
Bangla literature from this period. He has written the first Bangla epic Meghnad
Badh Kabya.
B. Write notes about Madhusudan under the following, headings. One is
done for you.
Madhusudan as a man Madhusudan as a poet
| ৬ celebrated 19 century
Bengali poet and dramatist
Cc. Read some more information on Madhusudan. Make questions
for those statements.
ccs
He introduced amitrakshar chhanda (blank verse) in Bangla literature.
Madhusudan passed most of his European days in Versailles, France.
His days in Europe were full of hardship.
It was unbearable to him as he had to suffer extreme poverty.
0. .২১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৭
It was Iswar Chandra Vidyasagar who helped him to pay off his debts নব
and return to India. নি

Roots 159
Madhusudan married twice. While living in Madras, he married Rebecca
Mactavys of English descent.

D. Work in pairs and decide how the story of Madhusudan is related

to the unit theme Roots.

E. Read the sentences carefully and identify the logical sequence of events

in Mikhail Naimys life. Then rearrange the sentences in the correct order

to form a meaningful paragraph.

a) He later returned to Lebanon, where he dedicated himself to Arabic literature

and philosophy.

b) Mikhail Naimy was born in 1889 in the small village of Baskinta, Lebanon.

c) His works often explored themes of spirituality, humanism, and the connec-

tion between East and West.

d) During his time in the U.S., he became a prominent member of the New York

Pen League, a group of Arab-American writers.

e) Naimy is best known for his book The Book of Mirdad, a spiritual masterpiece

that gained international acclaim.

f) He moved to the United States in 1911 to pursue higher education, studying

law and literature.

g) Naimys contributions to Arabic literature earned him a lasting legacy as one

of the Mahjar movement's most influential figures.

h) After completing his studies, he began writing poetry and essays in both

Arabic and English.

Lesson 4: In Search of Identity

A. 1)9 you ever read the Problem Page in magazines or newspapers?
What kinds of problems do people often write about?

B. 10010 are two letters from the problem page in the Daily Bangladesh.

Read them and discuss with a partner what you think the content of
২. the letters is. Use a dictionary to check any new words.
S
AQ

160 English For Today
Avajons Problem page 17 7%
Dear Avajon
Often I'm so sorry to see the citys footpaths occupied by floating people.
They are living in some makeshift shacks. I simply cannot think how father,
mother grandfather, grandmother and kidsall live in such a tiny place. Within
the few square yards in their possession they sleep, socialise, cook and even
beautify themselves. These people are living in such an inhuman condition!
This cannot be the picture of life in a civilized society. Also they are polluting
the area. They are least bothered about their health and hygiene. Out of curiosity,
I talked to some of these people. They have their own homes and identity in
their own village. They are here thinking that life in the city will be better.
What an irony! Can't the society or the state do anything for these people?
However, I must admit that I'm amazed to see how they sometimes tidy up
their places especially in the evening! Home, sweet home after all !
Mithun
Dear Mithun
I understand your concern. The movement of people from the rural areas to the
urban areas is a big social problem in many countries like ours. These floating
people are definitely a burden to the cities where they migrate. When the
number is huge, it is difficult for any state to rehabilitate them quickly. See
from the other side. The people you have referred to have lost their roots and
they are unable to assimilate in the new culture. Maybe many of them are
attracted by the charm of the cities, but I'm sure it was a need to many others.
People become rootless sometimes due to climate change, river erosion, social
discrepancies, or poverty. However, you cannot solve this problem overnight.
But you can certainly take steps to improve their lifestyle. Why don't you form
a committee with other young people in your locality that will teach them basic
health and hygiene? It may help them to minimise pollution. Give it a try.
Yours ২
Avajon Ss

Roots 161

C. Look at the texts. Say who/what they, their, this, that, it refer to
in the following sentences.

a. They are living in some makeshift shacks.

b. Within fewsquare yards in their possession they sleep,
socialise, cook and even beautify themselves.

c. This cannot be the picture of life in a civilized society.

d. Why dont you form a committee with other young people in your
locality that will teach them basic health and hygiene?

e. Give ita try.

D. Work in pairs. First,write two problem letters. The problems can be
personal or of your locality as in B. Read your partners problem
and give suggestions.

E. Work in groups. Take roles as a TV Anchor, Mojnu Mia, Fazlur
Rahman, and Nilima Chowdhury as given in the following text. Put
suitable verb form into each gap of the text related to your role.
Then, act out the talk show.

TV Anchor : Viewers, ................... to our program Looking back to roots.

Today we................... three guests with us-Mr Mojnu Mia, a
slum dweller, Mr Fazlur Rahman, an immigrant to UK, and a
social scientist Nilima Chowdhury. Today we ................668
to see how people ................... when they are detached
from their roots, what might................... some consequences,
and how a social scientist ........................ them. Let me
১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ LO Mr. Mojnu Mia. Mojnu Mia, where ............
you from and why and how have you................... to this
city?

162 English For Today

Mojnu Mia : 1710 from Sherpur. You .................. Its a river erosion-prone
area. The river has washed away most of my agricultural
land. It has................... my home as well. Now you can
Licsssessevseeeeeee that Pm a refugee. I and my family members
১১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০0: this city with our last savings. But Im
fed up with the life here. I ................... vegetables as
a hawker. I ...................very hard. [ 0801 5০০০০০০০০০০০০,
any time to my wife or kids. I ................. ina slum. Its very
dirty. People are sometimes involved in different sorts of crime.
My kids dont ................... it. Neither my wife nor me. In the
village, everybody used to ................... 9৪ but here no one
knows me. I have nowhere to ..............., NoMe tO ১১১০০১০০০০০০১১,
beside me. Nobody ................... me. I ................... the city
will give me a moderate life. But Im mistaken.

TV anchor : Right. We are really sorry to ................... about your situation.
Now let us ................... to Mr Fazlur Rahman. Mr. Rahman,
why did you ................... your country and how are you
feeling in the UK?

Fazlur Rahman: Well I was young when I went to UK. My first few years
were terrible. I ................... all kinds of odd jobs.
Gradually I ................... experience. Iw...
different professional training courses. And over the period
my language .................... Now Im a citizen there. I
১১১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০,, MY OWN detached home, personal car, and
business. When I .................... there I was a poor man but
now Im a rich man. ] .................... a good amount of
income tax but to be honest, when I.................... to my own
country, I wish I should not ................... to UK. Its my
own country. I .................. my friends and family members ্

Roots 163
here. I miss my culture, tradition, food, and what not? I
১১১১০০০০০০০, there for more than 15 years but still there is
a distinction between the native people and _ expatriates like
me. Perhaps we will never shake off our identity as foreigners.

TV Anchor : Ok, let us ................... the explanation of these problems
from a social scientist, Nilima Chowdhury. Ms Chowdhury,
what are your interpretations of these problems?

Nilima Chowdhury: You see, this problem is often ................... diaspora.
A diaspora is created through migration, or scattering of people
away from an established or ancestral homeland. There might be
different reasons for that. It may be due to government action,
political decisions or for avoiding conflict and war. Diaspora has
some common consequences. Once people are away from their
roots, they have a kind of culture shock. They take time to
55555555500 the new culture. Sometimes they never integrate.
This............. them a feeling of home sickness. In spite of
their strong fascination for homeland or hometown diaspora
people ....................t0 get back to their roots because of
ecomomic and social realities. As a result, they have a kind of
mental conflict and identity crisis which make their life restless.
Sometimes a lack of social acceptance coupled with economic
hardship, inadequate education, and loose family ties people
১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ INVOlVed in crimes. You may ask, Does it...........
that people wont .....................to other cities/countries?
People will, as itis 219: century when the world is a big global
village. But we .................. to be aware of the problems
created by migration. Its a reality that people with better ties
with their roots suffer less from this problem. So instead of being
allured by the better life we can .................... to be happy

৩ with what we have and gradually try to develop our condition
Ss without forgetting our roots.

Unit Thirteen
Loneliness

*
Learning Outcomes
after we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e know new words and extend our vocabulary
৬ read a text and understand overall meaning
৬ infer meanings from the context
e answer and give opinions on a given topic
২
N
S
NX

Loneliness 165

Lesson 1: Loneliness: Causes, Effects and Prevention

A. Look at the picture on the previous page and guess what the person

might be feeling. Make a list of those emotions and describe them briefly.

B. Lets read the following excerpt.

What is Loneliness? Causes, Effects and Prevention
By: Lindsay Modglin

Loneliness is a universal emotion that most of us experience at least once during

our lifetime, although certain events, such as an illness or a pandemic, can make

it feel more pervasive. If youre currently experiencing feelings of loneliness,

you arent alone. In fact, a 2020 study by Cigna found that 61% of Americans

reported being lonely in 2019, up from 54% in 2018.

No matter what events are occurring around you, understanding loneliness and

its risks is important for recognising when you may need support. Read on to

learn what loneliness is, its causes, long-term risks and ways to cope with the

emotions that may come up when youre lonely.

What Is Loneliness?

The American Psychological Association (APA) defines loneliness as the

affective and cognitive discomfort or uneasiness from being or perceiving

oneself to be alone or otherwise solitary.

In other words, loneliness is the mental or emotional discomfort you may

experience from either being alone or feeling as though you are alone. This

feeling stems from your social needs not being met and/or an inability to get the

social connection you desire.

Loneliness vs Being Alone

Although loneliness and being alone are commonly confused, being alone

doesnt necessarily mean someone is lonely. Loneliness is a feeling, while

being alone is a situation or state of being, which is not inherently negative,

says Nina Vasan, M.D., psychiatrist and professor at Stanford University School
শব of Medicine and chief medical officer at Real, an online mental wellness
& membership site.

166 English For Today
You can feel lonely even when youre surrounded by other peoplesuch as a
partner, family, co-workers or friends, continues Dr. Vasan.
Its also possible to be alone, but not feel lonely, she adds. For example, if
youre by yourself but connecting to others through good communication or
activities like volunteering, you dont feel lonely.
What Causes Loneliness?
There are various demographic factors that may contribute to loneliness.
Although Dr. Vasan notes that anyone can feel lonely at any time in their life, a
few groups that stand out as having an increased risk of loneliness include
young adults, mothers with young children and the elderly. Immigrants are
also at higher risk for loneliness, continues Dr. Vasan.
You may experience loneliness for a variety of reasons, but it can often stem
from a major life change. A 2020 study by the University of Edinburgh suggests
that the causes of loneliness differ depending on the age of the individual. For
example, older adults experience loneliness more frequently as a result of living
alone, while middle-aged individuals arent as likely to report living alone as a
cause of their loneliness.
This discrepancy between what causes loneliness in older adults versus those
who are middle-aged could be due to the fact that older adults have retired and
no longer have the community and daily interactions of work life, explains Nikki
Press, Psy.D., a clinical psychologist in New York City. Older individuals are
more likely to have lost friends and family members, and they are more likely to
experience medical or physical limitations that restrict their opportunities for
activities and socialising, continues Dr. Press.
Other common causes of loneliness include:
e The death of a close friend or family member
e Physical isolation, such as living alone or moving away from
family and friends
e Illness or disability
e Retirement
e Working alone
২
্

Loneliness 167
How to Cope with and Prevent Loneliness

Just as the cause of loneliness can vary from person to person, coping and
prevention strategies can also differ. In general, the goal is to make strong,
healthy connections that fulfill your need for social interaction.

While there is no substitute for help from a mental health professional, the
following tips may help you build emotional connections.

e Find hobbies you enjoy: Taking part in activities you enjoy can
be a great way to meet others with similar interests. Consider a book club,
art class, fitness group or any other activity where you can interact with
others who enjoy the same things.

e Volunteer for an organisation you support: Volunteering will
not only give you a sense of accomplishment and pride, but its an
opportunity to meet others who support that same organisation.

e Join support groups: Support groups are an excellent way to
connect with others who you have something in common with, such as a
mental or physical condition.

e Routinely contacting family and friends: Attempting to stay
connected, even if only by phone or video chat, can help nurture your
emotional health and help prevent loneliness.

e Maintain a healthy diet and regular exercise regime: Living a
healthy lifestyle promotes overall wellness and reduces your risk of
chronic medical conditionswhich could interfere with your social life.

Regardless of your interests, its important to listen to and fulfill your desire for
social connection. This can help diminish feelings of loneliness or isolation, and
could help improve the overall quality of your life.
(Abridged)
C. Answer the following questions.
1. What difference is there between being lonely and being alone?
2. What feelings a person may have when he/she is lonely?
3. What factors influence older adults loneliness?
4. Can you name some of the common causes of loneliness?
5. How can a person cope with loneliness and improve their quality
of life?
Q 6. Have you ever felt lonely and sad in your life? What was the
 reason for your loneliness and how did you overcome the situation?

168 English For Today
D. Fill in the blanks with the correct information from the above text.
1. | Every human being must feel lonely......... in a lifetime.
2. You can feel lonely even when you're ..........by other
peoplesuch as a........., family, ........... or friends.
3. Volunteering will not only give you a sense of ........... and ..........,
but its an opportunity to meet others who support that same organisation.
4. Staying connected via phone or video chat, can help .......... ones
emotional health and help .......... loneliness.
5. A few groups that stand out as having an increased risk of loneliness
include young adults, ............ with young children and the..............

E. Discuss in pairs and draw a mind map of causes, effects, and
ways of preventing loneliness. A sample mind map of Flood has been
done for you below.

Negalive
ae ক Effecis
a "Teuth of brung benz
i *Dongo: of houses aed
ad property
weep 'Spreand of yarce;
Areas
focrense 15 Ove proce of
isi: চাও দোহার
Causes
 [পার BEST inane
"Heavy এ দাদার -
* Broka:n Sora a
রাহাত regen ; ;
; Pasilive
. E fects
হ্যা আনে Elica
laescayqge [লিসর]ল
* ALD the fel
দ্যান
চা452৮০-7545
চা
২১
তব
S
বে

Loneliness 169
Lesson 2: A Poem
A. Read the following poem titled Solitude by Ella Wheeler Wilcox and
answer the questions that follow.
Solitude
By Ella Wheeler Wilcox
Laugh, and the world laughs with you;
Weep, and you weep alone;
For the sad old earth must borrow its mirth,
But has trouble enough of its own.
Sing, and the hills will answer;
Sigh, it is lost on the air;
The echoes bound to a joyful sound,
But shrink from voicing care.
Rejoice, and men will seek you;
Grieve, and they turn and go;
They want full measure of all your pleasure,
But they do not need your woe.
Be glad, and your friends are many;
Be sad, and you lose them all,
There are none to decline your nectared wine,
But alone you must drink life's gall.
Feast, and your halls are crowded;
Fast, and the world goes by.
Succeed and give, and it helps you live,
But no man can help you die.
There is room in the halls of pleasure
For a large and lordly train,
But one by one we must all file on
Through the narrow aisles of pain.

170 English For Today
B. Look up the dictionary for the meaning of the following words
and make a sentence with each of them.
Weep Shrink Decline Rejoice Nectar Gall Mirth Succeed
C. Answer the following questions from your understanding of the
poem you have just read.
1. Explain the following lines in your own words
1) Laugh, and the world laughs with you;
Weep, and you weep alone;
11) Succeed and give, and it helps you live,
But no man can help you die.
2. Why do the mountains echo the songs that we sing but not our sighs?
3. When do you have many friends and when do they leave you?
4. What does the poet imply about the nature of friendship and companionship
in the poem?
5. Do you agree with the poets view that people are only present during
happy times but absent during struggles? Why or why not?
6. How does the poem reflect the idea of self-reliance and inner strength?
7. What is the central theme of the poem "Solitude"?
D. Write a summary of the poem in your own words (100 words).
E. Write a letter to your best friend about your activities when you
feel lonely.
XO
বে
Q
N

Loneliness 171
Lesson 3: The Story of an Hour
A. Read the following story titled The Story of an Hour by Kate
Chopin and answer the questions.
The Story of an Hour
Kate Chopin

Knowing that Mrs. Mallard was afflicted with a heart trouble, great care
was taken to break to her as gently as possible the news of her husband's
death.
It was her sister Josephine who told her, in broken sentences; veiled hints
that revealed in half concealing. Her husband's friend Richards was there,
too, near her. It was he who had been in the newspaper office when
intelligence of the railroad disaster was received, with Brently Mallard's
name leading the list of "killed." He had only taken the time to assure
himself of its truth by a second telegram, and had hastened to forestall any
less careful, less tender friend in bearing the sad message.
She did not hear the story as many women have heard the same, with a
paralysed inability to accept its significance. She wept at once, with
sudden, wild abandonment, in her sister's arms. When the storm of grief
had spent itself she went away to her room alone. She would have no one
follow her.
There stood, facing the open window, a comfortable, roomy armchair. Into
this she sank, pressed down by a physical exhaustion that haunted her body
and seemed to reach into her soul.
She could see in the open square before her house the tops of trees that
were all aquiver with the new spring life. The delicious breath of rain was
in the air. In the street below a peddler was crying his wares. The notes of
a distant song which some one was singing reached her faintly, and
countless sparrows were twittering in the eaves.

২৩

S

N

172 English For Today
There were patches of blue sky showing here and there through the clouds
that had met and piled one above the other in the west facing her window.
She sat with her head thrown back upon the cushion of the chair, quite
motionless, except when a sob came up into her throat and shook her, as a
child who has cried itself to sleep continues to sob in its dreams.
She was young, with a fair, calm face, whose lines bespoke repression and
even a certain strength. But now there was a dull stare in her eyes, whose
gaze was fixed away off yonder on one of those patches of blue sky. It was
not a glance of reflection, but rather indicated a suspension of intelligent
thought.
There was something coming to her and she was waiting for it, fearfully.
What was it? She did not know; it was too subtle and elusive to name. But
she felt it, creeping out of the sky, reaching toward her through the sounds,
the scents, the color that filled the air.
Now, her bosom rose and fell tumultuously. She was beginning to
recognize this thing that was approaching to possess her, and she was
striving to beat it back with her will - as powerless as her two white slender
hands would have been.
When she abandoned herself, a little whispered word escaped her slightly
parted lips. She said it over and over under her breath: "free, free, free!"
The vacant stare and the look of terror that had followed it went from her
eyes. They stayed keen and bright. Her pulses beat fast, and the coursing
blood warmed and relaxed every inch of her body.
She did not stop to ask if it were or were not a monstrous joy that held her.
A clear and exalted perception enabled her to dismiss the suggestion as
trivial.
She knew that she would weep again when she saw the kind, tender hands
folded in death; the face that had never looked save with love upon her,
fixed and gray and dead. But she saw beyond that bitter moment a long
procession of years to come that would belong to her absolutely. And she
opened and spread her arms out to them in welcome. ৩
S
NX

Loneliness 173
There would be no one to live for during those coming years; she would
live for herself. There would be no powerful will bending hers in that blind
persistence with which men and women believe they have a right to
impose a private will upon a fellow-creature. A kind intention or a cruel
intention made the act seem no less a crime as she looked upon it in that
brief moment of illumination.
And yet she had loved him - sometimes. Often she had not. What did it
matter! What could love, the unsolved mystery, count for in face of this
possession of self-assertion which she suddenly recognized as the
strongest impulse of her being!
"Free! Body and soul free!" she kept whispering.
Josephine was kneeling before the closed door with her lips to the keyhole,
imploring for admission. "Louise, open the door! I beg, open the door -
you will make yourself ill. What are you doing Louise? For heaven's sake
open the door."
"Go away. I am not making myself ill." No; she was drinking in a very
elixir of life through that open window.
Her fancy was running riot along those days ahead of her. Spring days, and
summer days, and all sorts of days that would be her own. She breathed a
quick prayer that life might be long. It was only yesterday she had thought
with a shudder that life might be long.
She arose at length and opened the door to her sister's importunities. There
was a feverish triumph in her eyes, and she carried herself unwittingly like
a goddess of Victory. She clasped her sister's waist, and together they
descended the stairs. Richards stood waiting for them at the bottom.
Someone was opening the front door with a latchkey. It was Brently
Mallard who entered, a little travel-stained, composedly carrying his
grip-sack and umbrella. He had been far from the scene of accident, and
did not even know there had been one. He stood amazed at Josephine's
piercing cry; at Richards quick motion to screen him from the view of his
wife.

S

XQ

174 English For Today

But Richards was too late.

When the doctors came they said she had died of heart disease - of joy that

kills.

B. Answer the following questions.

1. | Who had brought the news of Mr. Brently Mallards death?

2. | How did Mr. Mallard die, according to the rumour?

3. | Why was everyone scared of breaking the news to Mrs. Mallard?
4. How did Mrs. Mallard react after getting the death news?

5. | How did her reactions change when she went to her room?

6. | Why do you think Mrs. Mallard felt happy and free?

7. What do you mean by the statement a joy that kills?

8. | What happened to Mrs. Mallard at the end of the story?

C. Work in pairs with the friend next to you and think of a sad news
that you both have to convey to your classmate. Now, write a dialogue
with that friend to whom you are informing the sad news to.

References

Modgin, L. (2023). What is loneliness? Causes, effects and prevention. Forbes

Health.

Loneliness: Causes, Effects And Prevention  Forbes Health

q
স্

Unit Fourteen
Renewable Energy
বস নিস ট it Pao, a . oe :
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e describe familiar objects
৬ participate in conversation, discussion
e read intensively and extensively
e write formal letters.
xa)
S
NQ

176 English For Today

Lesson 1: Renewable Energy Sources (Part 1)

A. Pairwork. Read the words in the box. Which of the words are related

to energy?

Now, underline the odd word in each column that doesn't belong to the

group. Then compare with your partner. Check the meanings of the new

words in a dictionary.

B. Read the text and answer the questions that follow.

In a speech at the 90" Science

Congress, internationally তি

acknowledged scientist and  pln টি

former Indian president Mr. APJ tie রি. y

Abdul Kalam mentioned a very iin go a

important aspect of this mankinds ge a

future energy crisis. He pointed ., SY ee oa

out that the era of wood and bio- - এ i |

coe + era 7 | .   - to.

mass has almost come to an end. (iii | ৮৮০০১ রর

The age of oil and natural gas

would soon be over within the next few decades. Massive burning of world's

coal reserves may lead to a worldwide ecological disaster because coal burning

emits the highest amount of carbon in the atmosphere. So according to Kalam,

the only solution that mankind can look to is the massive use of solar energy in

future because it has some advantages over other forms of renewable energies.
২৩
fon
S
AN

Renewable Energy 177
Now, why has Kalam put so much importance to the issue of energy? The energy
sources have always been a major factor of change throughout history. The
world's petroleum consumption has increased from 3 billion barrels annually in
1930 to 37 billion barrels annually today. In the next quarter century, the world's
population is expected to be about 8 billion which is 30 percent higher than
today. Developing countries will grow their economies about two times faster
than industrialised countries. Global economic growth is expected to continue at
3 percent per year. Consequently, the global demand for energy will grow at
about 1.7 percent per year on an average. It indicates a 50-percent rise of energy
consumption by 2030. If the world's daily petroleum consumption is 100 million
barrels now, it will rise to 150 million barrels by that time. The present reserve
of hydro-carbon energy resources is limited and it will not be sufficient to meet
the future energy challenges of the world. Hence, leading industrial
countries have taken initiatives to use alternative energy sources mainly known
as green or renewable energy sources. The bottom line of Kalam's speech
indicates the concern of mankind in the 21st century.
Questions:

1. What is the scientist Kalam concerned about?

2. Why do you think the massive burning of coal may lead to an ecological

disaster?

3. What according to Mr Kalam is the solution of future energy crisis?

4. Why does Mr Kalam put so much importance on the issue of energy?

5. Why does Mr Kalam put much importance on solar energy?

178 English For Today
C. Make sentences using the substitution table.
The energy industries the use of renewable energy
taken sources.
The global petroleum have been a major factor for change
consumption .
has emphasised | throughout history.
increased 1111
Major industrial economies to three billion barrels per year.
initiatives to tap alternative
Scientists energy sources.
D. Complete the following passage with words from the box. There are
more words than necessary.
suggested radiates would effective conducted either energy
affected crisis use were
To answer the energy.......... in the world, scientist, professor, and former Indian
president Mr. APJ Abdul Kalam has ........... that solar energy can be harnessed
by establishing space stations in outer space in order to.......... solar power round
the clock.
Mr. Kalam said that the sun .......... about 10 trillion times the energy which
humans consume across the world today.
If we .......... able to extract even a small portion of this energy from the
sun, it .......... be sufficient to secure the energy demands of our future.
Pointing out that space based solar power plants do not get .......... by
weather, the scientist said that it would thus be far more .......... in
efficiency and power generation than the surface based systems.
XO
বে
Q
N

Renewable Energy 179
Professor Kalam suggested that the energy should be transmitted from space
back to earth .......... through microwave or any other technology like laser.

Careful research of the impact and safety concerns would have to be.......... in

this regard.

E. 'Massive burning of world's coal reserves may lead to a worldwide
ecological disaster ...'--- Do you support this view? Explain why/why
not.

F. In Sohan's village, some people headed by Mr Asadul Islam came from
an organisation to hold a meeting at the local Union Parishad (UP)
Office. Their objective was to introduce alternative power supply
systems in rural households. Read the dialogue between the UP
Chairman and Mr. Islam.

Chairman : Whats your alternative power supply system?

Mr.Islam : Well, its solar power and we are going to use solar power units

in rural areas.

Chairman : What is it? Is it something new?

Mr.Islam : Not exactly. Its already familiar in many parts of the world. Weve
introduced it in our country too. But yes, in this locality its
something new.

Chairman : I see. Why do you call it alternative power supply system?

Mr.Islam : Because solar power is a substitute for conventional electricity.
Its actually a renewable energy source. Our solar units can be
installed on open roof tops or at any open place where sunlight is
available.

Chairman : Sounds good. How much electricity can they give? Can they run
my irrigation pump?

২৩
S
N

180 English For Today

Mr.Islam : Im afraid Mr.Chairman, they cant. Our solar panels are small
and are designed for domestic purposes only. They can produce
enough electricity to run say, two or three tube lights, two fans, a
TV set and the like. But larger units can run...

Chairman : Sorry to interrupt Mr. Asad. Ive to go to the bus stand now to
receive a friend. Anyway, several villages in our Union are
still without electricity. I hope people will welcome your alternative
power supply system.

Mr.Islam : Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Goodbye.

Chairman : Goodbye, Mr. Islam. See you again.

G._ True or False? If false, write the correct answer.

]. Alternative power supply system is a completely new system in
our country.

2. A renewable energy source can be a substitute for conventional
electricity.

3. Solar power units of Mr.Islam are for commercial use only.

H. What questions would you like to ask Mr. Islam about solar panel, solar
unit, energy sources, alternative power supply system, its capacity, its
advantages and disadvantages, etc? Make a list of your probable
questions.

I. Role play. Work in pairs. You take the role of the Chairman and

your partner the role of Mr. Islam. Rewrite the dialogue and act if out.
২
নে
S
NX

Renewable Energy 181

Lesson 2: Renewable Energy Sources (Part 2)

A. Look at the following pictures and discuss with your partner what

you see in them. How are the two pictures related to each other?
০ ক Vel
ন ae eg . we
rely 8১: লন t.
শু
N AZ. 7
জল শর aS ,
=> স্পা

B. Read the text and answer the questions that follow.

Countries of the world rely heavily on petroleum, coal and natural gas for their

energy sources. There are two major types of energy sources: renewable and

non-renewable. Hydro-carbon or fossil fuels are non-renewable sources of

energy. Reliance on them poses real big problems. First, fossil fuels such as oil,

coal, gas etc, are finite energy resources and the world eventually will run out of

them. Secondly, they will become too expensive in the coming decades and too

damaging for the environment. Thirdly, fossil fuels have direct polluting impacts

on earth's environment causing global warming. In contrast, renewable energy

sources such as, wind and solar energy are constantly and naturally replenished

and never run out.

Most renewable energy comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Sunlight

or solar energy can be used for heating and lighting homes, for generating

electricity and for other commercial and industrial uses.

The sun's heat drives the wind and this wind energy can be captured with wind

turbines to produce electricity. Then the wind and the sun's heat cause water to

evaporate. When the water vapour turns into rain or snow and flows downhill

into rivers or streams, its energy can be captured as hydroelectric energy.

Along with the rain and snow, sunlight causes plants to grow. Plants produce
< biomass which again can be turned into fuels such as firewood, alcohol, etc.
S 008 are called bioenergy.

182 English For Today
Scientists have identified Hydrogen as another form of renewable energy source.
It is the most abundant element in nature. But it does not exist separately as a
gas. It is always combined with other elements, such as with oxygen to make
water. Hydrogen, separated from another element, can be burned as a fuel to
produce electricity.

Our Earth's interior contains molten lava which gives off extreme heat. This heat

inside the Earth produces steam and hot water which can be used as

geothermal energy to produce electricity for heating homes, etc.

Ocean energy comes from several sources. Ocean's force of tide and wave can

be used to produce energy. The surface of the ocean gets more heat from the sun

than the ocean depths. This temperature difference can be used as energy source
too.

Questions

1. What do you mean by renewable energy sources?

2. What are the problems with non-renewable energy sources?

3. What are the major differences between renewable and non-renewable
energy sources?

Cc. Which of the renewable energy sources mentioned in the text have you
heard of before? One of those resources is used in the Chittagong Hill
Tracts (CHT) to produce electricity. Can you say what it is? Browse the
net in groups to find out the answers to the following issues and present
them to the class.

1. What is the name of the project?
2. Where in the CHT is the project located?
3. When did it start operation?
4, How much electricity is being produced from here for the national
grid?
5. How many units are working there?
6. What is the positive impact of the project on our national
development? ৩
Ss
N

Renewable Energy 183

D. Read the dialogue between Raju, a student of class ten and his uncle, Mr.

Barua who works at Sangu Gas Field and answer the questions

that follow.

Mr.Barua : What are you reading, Raju?

Raju : English, Uncle. A chapter on renewable energy sources.

Mr.Barua_ : Isee. Do you know renewable energy is also called green energy?

Raju : Green energy?... No Uncle, I dont know. Nothing is there about
green energy in the text either.

Mr.Barua_ : Are you sure? Anyway, renewable energy sources provide us with
energy which doesnt harm environment during its production or
consumption. Say, solar energy. You see, theres no burning, no
smoke, no emission of gases. Its a sort of clean technology and
clean energy source.

Raju : Oh exactly. Thats what our teacher said, I remember.

Mr.Barua_ : On the other hand, burning fossil fuels, say oil or coal, emits
greenhouse gases that harm the environment.

Raju : O... I see. Yes, ?ve got the clue, Uncle. Thanks a lot. I now
understand the relation between the two pictures in section A. Green
energy sources make a green globe.

Questions

1. Why is renewable energy called green energy?

2. Nothing is there about green energy in the text either. --- Do you think
this statement of Raju is correct? Explain why yes/no.

3. I now understand the relation between the two pictures in section A.
What does Raju mean here? What does he really understand? Do you
agree with Rajus view here? Why?

E. Read the dialogue and act it out in pairs.

A : Whats solar energy?
B : Its one of the renewable energy sources.
A : Why is it called green energy?
B : Well, its green energy because it helps us keep the Earth green.
I mean it doesnt emit any pollutants in the atmosphere when
Q we produce and use it.
শি

184 English For Today
A : see. Then it must be a clean source of energy.
B : Exactly. And thats why its also called clean energy.
Now complete the following dialogue taking cues from the above model.
A : Whats wind energy?
B Its one of the .১.০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০,
A : Whys it called ....১১০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৭
B : Well, its green energy because .....০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০0০
Earth green. I mean it doesnt .....,,,০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০,
২০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ When we produce
and use it.
A :Tsee. Then it .............. ০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ 90৮06 Of Energy.
B : Exactly. And thats why ......................... clean energy.

F. Now write dialogues on hydroelectricity, ocean energy, geothermal

energy, hydrogen energy, using the model in E above.

G. Both South and North Dhaka City Corporation are installing solar
panels in place of conventional electricity connections to illuminate
roads in many areas. Write a letter to the editor of a daily newspaper
appreciating this initiative and saying why this should be followed by
other city authorities too.

S
ron

Unit Fifteen
Media and Modes of E-communication
- . ao \ ,
axt We
A OM GO e
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to
e surf the Internet
e read and write emails
e narrate incidents in a logical sequence
৬ understand texts
e read intensively and extensively
৬ participate in debates.

186 English For Today
Lesson 1: Media and Modes of E-communication
A. Look at the pictures and say what you see in them.
. চু Ss
Sw a l
GO =
B. Work in pairs. Discuss which of the following words you are familiar
with. How are they related to e-communication?
facebook, e-mail, web site, blog, e-commerce, twitter, e-learning, iPod,
tablet pc, information super high way, social network, smart phone
C. Read the text and answer the questions that follow.
Lets imagine ৪ citizens .
ordinary day at work. The সস cc:
morning probably starts with a | ৬৪৬ Sagres ors 2০,
cup of coffee/tea, followed by ae ৮
greeting the colleagues. Then 14552 Mae
comes the inevitable, which is | ~~ 38 |
log in the computer. For many | a | zt রে
of us the third step has become | vn * re
an automatic behavior and it 2 777 রে coe
dominates the rest of our work [tae | mo
day, receiving and sending [mF
dozens of emails. ,
An e-mail is an electronic -
mail. It is a computer-aided পপি
way of exchanging digital text 
Q
nN

Media and Modes of E-communication 187
messages from a sender to one or multiple recipient/s. E-mails operate through
a network of computers linked by the Internet. There are commercial server
agencies such as Yahoo, Gmail, Ymail, Hotmail, etc. that accept the text
message from the sender, forward it and deliver instantly to the digital mailbox
of the recipient. If the recipient is not online, the message is stored and delivered
later when the recipient is online. It works instantly just with the click of your
mouse. It has been a powerful communication tool in modern life.
Questions:
1. What is an e-mail?
2. How do e-mails operate?
3. How do the commercial servers serve in the process of an e-mail?
4. It has been a powerful communication tool in modern life. Explain the
statement.
5. How do e-mails affect our daily work schedule?
D. Work in pairs and discuss the steps of your normal days, weekends etc.
E. Pairwork. Read the following e-mail exchanged between two friends.
Like an informal letter, an e-mail to a close one is casually written.
Identify the mistakes in the main body of the message, discuss with your
partner, and correct them.
Subject: Details of Dhaka Tour
FROM: Alexa Dowson<alexa.dowson@yahoo.com>
TO: Moutushi Laboni<moutushil997@ymail.com>
Monday, 21 May 2012 6:20 AM
Hi Moutushi!
Thanks for your mail. I'll fly from Ottawa on 7:36 hours local time on 13 July
with Qatar Airlines via London-Doha and land Dhaka on 15 July around 13:41
hours local time. Wish to stay 2 days in the Cox's Bazar and | day in Khulna.
Return flight on 21 July at 3:04 hours local time.
Keep in touch and stay fine. Hope to see you soon!
২৩
Ss Alexa

188 English For Today
F. Pairwork. The e-mail in section E is a reply by Alexa to Moutushis
previous e-mail. Imagine what Moutushi might have written to Alexa.
Write that e-mail.
G. 1২০90 the following text. It gives the information about the origin of
the e-mail. Choose the appropriate forms of the verbs from the box
to complete the sentences. You can use a verb more than once.
send say use remain call expand allow develop spread
Sending text messages electronically could be ................ to date back to the
Morse code telegraph of the mid 1800s and the 1939 New York Worlds Fair. In
the fair, IBM .................a letter of congratulations from San Francisco to
New York on an IBM radio-type, ................. 10 a high-speed substitute for
mail service in the world of tomorrow. Teleprinters were ................ 10
Germany during World War II. The use ................. until the late 1960s
when there was a worldwide Telex network. Additionally, there was the
similar American system ................ TWX which ................ important
until the late 1980s.
With the introduction of MITs Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) in
1961, for the first time multiple users were ................ to log into a
central system from remote dial-up terminals. They were also able to store
and share files on the central disk. Informal methods of using this to pass
messages ................ and were ................ to create the first true e-mail
system.
H. Read the following grid first. Then listen to the Audio and tick
the right box in the following grid.
Listening text 10 |
Comparison among e-mails, phone conversations and face to face meetings নব
S
. NX

Media and Modes of E-communication 189
Phone
conversations
I Group work. Arrange a debate in the class on the advantages
and the disadvantages of the e-mail.
Lesson 2: Social Network Services
A. Look at the following logos. Are you familiar with them? Discuss
with your partner what they are and how they are related to the
field of e-communication.
facebook (X)
B. _ Read the text and answer the following questions.
The Internet technology has helped desgin a large number of web sites to
facilitate social relations among people around the world. These are known as
social networking services or social networks or social media. At present, Face-
book is the most popular social media site. LinkedIn, X (formerly Twitter), Google+ etc.
are other frequently used social services. Social network services are web-based
and hence, provide ways for the users to interact through the Internet. These
services make it possible to connect people across the borders and thus have
ww, Made the users feel that they really live in a global village.
cN
৩
১)

190 English For Today
Why are social networks expanding so fast? The answer is simple. Most of the
social services are cost-free. You can make use of them free, paying a very little
to your Internet service provider. Secondly, you can make your personal profile
public before the entire online community. It is like presenting yourself before
the entire world. You can also look into other people's profile if you are
interested. It is simple and easy. Thirdly, social networks allow users to upload
pictures, multimedia contents and modify the profile. Some services like
Facebook allow users to update their profiles. Fourthly, networks allow users to
post blog entries. User profiles have a section dedicated to comments from
friends and other users. Finally, there are privacy protection measures too. A user
himself or herself decides over the number of visitors/viewers, and what
information should be shared with others.

Questions

1. What do you understand by social networks?

2. What are some uses of social networks?

3. These services ...have made the users feel that they really live in a global
village. Do you agree with this view? Why/ Why not?

4. Make a list of the arguments as to why social networks are expanding so
fast. Why do you think this is happening?

C. _ Read the second paragraph of the text in section B again. Notice the
words in italics and write how they work in maintaining logical
sequence in the paragraph.

D. Choose the best answers.

1. The technology has helped social networking sites to emerge.
a. LinkedIn b. Googlet+
c. Internet d. Twitter
2. Users have to pay for
a. social networks. b. their online connections.
c. multimedia contents. d. uploading pictures.
3. User accounts have ----------- protection measures.
a. virus b. identity
c. personal secrecy d. network
4. User profiles have a section for
a. others remarks. b. outsiders editing. S
c. outsiders moderation. d. outsiders uploading. q

Media and Modes of E-communication 191
E. Fill in the following dialogue box to open a Facebook account.
শা - i - a | cared Dee = ee দত হি লালিত ti - . f=
শর 2 * OF 1 জ হো
facebook a a ~-
Fry UL OER আআ লা জজের
২০ ০৮০৮৭ se সাই চলত শী ee oe
F. Look at the following table adapted from Wikipedia. It shows some
data on worldwide use of social networks.
৪ :
Social Networks Individual users Percentage ( 9) of
popularit
Google+ 250,000,000 17.7 % worldwide
Twitter 167,903,000 11.7% worldwide
LinkedIn 94,823,000 6.6 % Asia and Europe
MySpace 61,037,000 42% USA and Canada
Others 255,539,000 17.8 %
Total 1,438,877,000 100%
Now complete the following dialogues about Facebook and MySpace,
and provide your own questions and answers on the rest of the social
networks in the table. Act them out in pairs.
খু 1. ৫: social network is the most popular ?
৭২ A: Facebook is .

192 English For Today
Q: individual users use Facebook?
A: About 793 million.
Q: part of the world is Facebook mostly used in?
A: Worldwide. Its popular worldwide among individual users.
2.Q: the least popular ?
A: MySpace is .
Q: individual users use MySpace?
A: .
Q: mostly used?
A: among individual users.
(Continue)
Lesson 3: E-learning
A. Look at the following picture. What objects do you see in the picture?
How are they related? Discuss with your partner and say what these
are.
B. Work in pairs. Discuss the following questions.
e Have you ever experienced any digital education programmes in
multimedia or CD/DVD? S
NN

Media and Modes of E-communication 193
e Have you ever used any digitized educational resources such as Oxford
Dictionary, Banglapedia or Wikipedia?
e Have you ever heard of any online education course?
e Have you ever seen a classroom teaching programme on TV?
C. 7২০90 the text and answer the questions that follow.
Can you think of a classroom where there is no blackboard or desks? Do you
believe that you can be a student without a printed book or a writing pad or even
pen/pencil? Are you not thrilled to imagine that you have asked a question and
your tutor is answering it while flying in a Boeing from Dubai to Dhaka? These
are all possible in a 'virtual campus' in the system of e-learning. No kidding! For
quite a long time, educationists have been utilizing the advantages of computer
technology. The social networking services have a huge potential to help
educationists in this sector. They have access to millions of people worldwide.
Educationists have noticed that a large number of social network users come
from young generation who especially belong to student community. So side by
side with computer assisted teaching-learning software, online education
programmes are evolving fairly rapidly to assist conventional education system.
Is that e-learning?
We may confuse distant education or computer-based learning or computer-
assisted training or even online education programmes with e-learning. But we
should be cautious about the mix-up. What happens in
an online education programme? Maybe you get some
materials online from your tutor. Maybe you submit at
your assignment through email. Or even you may take Ff: শিপ
your test online. But there must be some conventional * kh
campus, a department/institute from where your ৮
certificate will come. But in e-learning, as said by ছি a
global e-learning guru Dr. Badrul H Khan*, every step, } a
such as registration, admission, classroom entry and | a S|
exit, class work, attendance, discussion with course Dr. Badrul H Khan
mates, feedback, exams and finally certification must take place electronically
through computer and the Internet technology in a virtual campus.

194 English For Today
Everything is digitised and conducted by a system called Learning Management
System (LMS). So online education programmes blend various components of
e-learning.

The revolutionary concept of e-learning is already in its practice phase in many

parts of the world. Professor Khan has developed a framework and important

literatures on e-learning which have been praised by pundits worldwide

He is especially enthusiastic about the prospect of e-learning in Bangladesh.

How would you feel if Bangladesh contemplates establishing South Asia's first

virtual university? Won't it be a pioneering step for us in the world of e-learning?

Let's keep our fingers crossed.

*Born in Bangladesh and graduated in the United States, Dr. Badrul H Khan

was a Professor at George Washington University and the University of Texas,

USA. He is one of the celebrated theorists in the field of e-learning.

D. Write an e-mail to your teacher expressing your feelings and opinion
regarding the next mode of education e-learning. Also ask your
teacher to clarify if anything in the text is unclear to you.

E. Suppose Dr. Badrul Huda Khan has come to visit your school and
intends to meet students for a presentation on e-learning. Write a text
message to invite your friend to attend the presentation.

Xo
S
CQ

Media and Modes of E-communication 195
F. Complete the following sentences with suitable words.

1. Education experts ............ ............. Utilising the advantages of
computer technology ............. a long time.

2. In e-learning, everything from admission to certification must ..............
১১০০০০০০০০০, electronically through computer and the Internet technology
in a virtual campus.

3. In some online courses, you ............. ০০০০০০০০০০০, your test online.

4. Incase of online programmes, there ............cccceeee ce eceestteeee eee eees
some conventional campus from where

5. In e-learning, all activities ....০০০০০০০০০০ ০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০0% a system
called Learning Management System (LMS).

২০
S
বে

Unit Sixteen
Graffiti
j ~ r . ) - + |
iH 2
পা | A Fe
172 if!
r 1 এ ss | 1 Lan ~
শর ' . . =e ial |

"Why did you kill my son?"graffiti on a Dhaka metro rail pillar near Mirpur 10 circle.
Learning outcomes
After we have studied this unit, we will be able to

e describe the function of graffiti during peoples movements in

Bangladesh

e recognize graffiti as a form of art

e redefine our responsibilities as citizens
A. Read the text and complete the activities that follow.
Art should comfort the disturbed and disturb the comfortable, writes the
pseudonymous street artist Banksya sentiment that encapsulates the spirit of
graffitis defiance. 

S
স্ব

Graffiti 197
On 16 July 2024, Abu Sayeed, an unarmed organizer of the students' movement
for quota reform at Begum Rokeya University in Rangpur, was shot and killed
by police as he stood with his arms stretched out, leaving his mother, Monowara
Begum, shell-shocked and crying, "My son only wanted a job; if you dont want
to give him a job, then dontbut why did you kill him?"
Since the 1960s, graffiti in _ 0 জাপানি দ্র > ue 7
Bangladesh has served as a rm NS Lag
powerful voice for resistance.  ; an
In 1966, student activists eee +s eee ! oa a a
spray-painted slogans 11100 1. 1. ডু শে 21 শর
Down with Ayub Khan on te rc hfe Pe 4
walls, using graffiti as a covert _ =~ vit
means of protest against a . - . ক -
repressive regime. When of |]
military forces approached, লু i i Lt =
they shouted chika! ' af : >
chika!a word meaning | 7 8 ঠা
mole or muskrat pretending We ; গা
they were killing rodents to  এ i এ yh
disguise their actions. This 4 1 | r
guerrilla tactic marked the ei # 4 |. ০
beginning of graffiti as a tool F এ. ফি কা পা |
of dissent in Bangladesh, and it | eis 5 রি 1 তা |
played a crucial role in the aaa  Re
Liberation War in 1971. ri a its
Noor Hossain, with the words "Down with Autocracy" ("স্বৈরাচার নীপাত যাক";
however, the Bangla spelling for নীপাত is নিপাত - the misspelling underscoring
raw spontaneity of such expressions) boldly painted in bright white on his bare
chest, was photographed by Dinu Alam on 10 November, 1987, during a
pro-democracy protest in Dhaka. Shortly after, he was shot and killed by
Bangladesh Police.



=

198 English For Today
' oy এ
Psy zy
14 !
iq] |
Wall art featuring Noor Hossain's iconic photograph, displayed on a Dhaka wall.
In recent times, graffiti has resurfaced as a powerful expression of dissent,
particularly during the July uprising. Spray-painted messageslike The
country is nobodys fathersinvoked the legacy of past movements, echoing
the iconic Gonotontro Mukti Paak (Let Democracy Be Free), famously
written on the body of protester Noor Hossain during the Ershad regime. Each
stroke of paint carried forward a history of defiance that has shaped
Bangladeshs political landscape, drawing connections between past and present
struggles for justice.
' দূ
4 rT a লে শি a ল
৩.1 ই .  ae
EF : g. h 'ু শর স্পা oe qd শর ;
Wall art depicting iconic moments of the July uprising Q
=

Graffiti 199
Graffitis potency lies in its subversive, guerrilla nature. Unlike wall art, which
is typically organized and sanctioned, graffiti thrives on immediacy, spontaneity,
and the risk of persecution. Where wall art may take time and care, graffiti is
often quick, requiring speed and anonymity due to the threat of detection. Its
purpose is to challenge power, counter surveillance, and inscribe messages that
are otherwise censored or suppressed.
The July uprising brought new dimensions to this medium of dissent.
Spray-painted slogans defied erasure, embodying collective rage and
revolutionary solidarity. Demands like Ek dofa, ek dabi, shoirachar tui kobe
jabi? surfaced as cries for justice, echoing the French philosopher Jacques
Derridas assertion that What cannot be said... must not be silenced but
written.
A strong sense of inclusivity was 5,
also reflected in the wall art and . | |
graffiti during and after the July *
uprising, which highlighted the
case of the marginalized and |. ce *
minoritized people in multiple ৷ *
instances. Numerous graffiti and Gal oy
wall art pieces not only called for |
justice but also carried a broader |
message of liberation, Not a land
of one nation, Bangladesh is a qk fe
land of many communities র্ দু :
symbolizing the interconnected ARC.  |
struggles of all communities. It wit yi টি একি ন না !
underscored the message i.e. our 4 Ri kag aah |.
collective liberation is / 7
intertwined, with the fight for চি
justice uniting people across রিল দিদি. রিনি 1 ই
regions and backgrounds. * cial এ হাওর ৃ ৬
Wall art stating: "Not a land of one nation,
Bangladesh is a land of many communities."
The true power of graffiti lies in its resilience; it persists as a medium for
revolutionary memory and collective consciousness. It speaks for those
৩ silenced, ensures the struggles of the marginalized endure, and, as Banksys
S words suggest, comforts the disturbed while disturbing the comfortable.

200 English For Today

B. Answer the following questions based on your reading of the passage:

1. How does graffiti serve as a powerful tool of resistance and dissent,
especially in political movements? Compare its role in Bangladesh from the
1960s to the July uprising of 2024.

2. How does graffiti reflect the interconnected struggles for justice across
different communities and regions? How do slogans like From the plains to
the hills, this time liberation is for all illustrate this message?

3. In what ways do graffiti and wall art differ in terms of their purpose,
creation, and the risks involved? What makes graffiti a more subversive,
guerrilla form of expression?

4. What role do immediacy and anonymity play in the creation of graffiti,
especially in politically charged contexts? Why are these characteristics
essential to its effectiveness?

5. How can graffiti contribute to collective memory and preserve the
struggles of marginalized communities, as seen in the recent protests? What
makes it an enduring form of expression, even in the face of censorship?

C. Writing Exercise:

Graffiti has been considered a significant form of expression in political

movements, especially in times of oppression. Write a short essay discussing the

role of graffiti in resisting censorship and challenging power, particularly in the
context of Bangladeshs history. Analyze how graffiti, as a form of spontaneous
and guerrilla expression, differs from other more organized artistic expressions
like wall art. Use examples from the passage, including the slogans during the

July uprising, to support your argument.

D. Group Work: Graffiti or Wall Art Project

In your group, design a graffiti or wall art piece that expresses your message of

resistance, solidarity, or demand for change. Focus on the symbolism, color

choices, and text that will best represent your cause. Afterward, explain your
design choices and how they reflect the message you want to convey to the
public.
২১
S
AN

201
Sample Question
Subject: English Ist Paper
Grade: Nine
Time: 3 hours Marks: 100
[Marks for individual items are mentioned next to the test items]
Part A - Reading (Marks: 70)

Read the text and answer the questions 1 & 2
Heritage is what we inherit from the past, live with in the present and then pass
on to our children or future generations. Our unique source of life and inspiration
is our cultural and natural heritage. When we speak out of World Heritage
indicates places and sites that we inherited from the past and pass on to the future
generation of the entire world.
The Shat Gambuj Mosque in Bagerhat is such a heritage. It became a UNESCO
World Heritage Site in 1985. Originally the Historic City was known as
Khalifatabad. It is situated at the outskirts of Bagerhat town not very far from
the dense mangrove forest of the Sundarbans. Khalifatabad was a Muslim
colony. It was founded by the Turkish general, a saint warrior Ulugh Khan Jahan
in the 15th century .The infrastructure of the city reveals significant technical
skills in many mosques as well as early Islamic monuments. Baked bricks were
used for the construction of the buildings. The planning of the city was
dominated by the tradition of Islamic architecture and the decorations were a
combination of Mughal and Turkish architecture.
Khan Jahan built a network of roads, bridges, public buildings and reservoirs to
make the city habitable. There were about 360 mosques in the city. Among them
the most remarkable is the multi-domed Shat Gambuj Mosque. The mosque is
unique in the sense that it has 60 pillars that support the roof, with 77 low height
domes. The 4 towers at the 4 corners have smaller domes at the top as well. The
vast prayer hall has 11 arched doorways in the East and 7 each on the North
South for light and ventilation. It has 7 aisles running along the length of the
mosque and 11 deep curves between the slender stone columns. These columns
support the curving arches created by the domes. The thickness of the arches is
6 feet and have slightly narrowing hollow and round wall.
The west wall in the interior has 11 mihrabs. These mihrabs are decorated with
stone work and terracotta. The floor of the mosque is made of brick.
Besides being used as a prayer hall, Khan Jahan used the mosque as the court
too. Today, it is one of the greatest tourist attractions and one of the best
architectural beauties of Bangladesh.

202 English For Today
1. Choose the correct answer from the following alternatives: | 1x7=7
a) Khalifatabad was a colony where lived the -
i. Chainess 11. Muslims 111. Christians iv. Portugees
b) Shat Gambuj Mosque got the status of a world heritage site from -
i. 1985 11. 1995 ili. 1965 iv. 1975
০) The mosque is situated in -
i. Khulna it. Cumilla ili. Bagerhat iv. Barishal
d) The surface of the mosque 1s of -
i. stone ii. marbel 111. brick iv. iron
e) What is the meaning of the word Significant?
i. evidential ii. inconsiderable iii. meaningless __ iv. irrelevant
f) The mosque was established by a person who was -
i. Turkish ii. British iii. American iv. Irani
g) What is the opposite word of Inspiration?
1. encouragement
il. hindrance
lll. innovation
2. Answer the following questions. 2x5=10
a) What is World Heritage?
b) What do you know about Khalifatabad?
c) What is the floor of the mosque made of?
d) What were the activities of Khan Jahan Ali to make the city
habitable?
e) Why do you think the decoration of the Shat Gambuj Mosque is
unique?
3. Fillin each gap with a suitable word based on the information of the text. 15-5
We use the term World Heritage ina(a)__ sense because 11
represents a place or site to the entire world. The Shat Gambuj mosque in
Bagerhat is(b)__sas. a World Heritage site in 1985. The mosque is famous
forits(c) _ Islamic architecture. Ulugh Khan Jahan Ali founded it who was
not only a saint but alsoa(d)__. He decorated the old city Khalifatabad to
(ec) _ the tradition of Islamic architecture. 
নব

Graffiti 203
Read the following passage carefully and answer the question no 4 & 5
Nobel prize is awarded every year for outstanding performance in the field of
science, literature and for promoting world peace. Under this prize, the winner
gets a gold medal, a certificate and a large sum of money. The Nobel prize is the
worlds most important prize. The prize is given to the persons with most
outstanding contributions in six fields, namely Physics, Chemistry, Literature,
Physiology or Medicine, Peace and Economics. Economics was added in this
list in 1969 for the first time. One prize 1s awarded in each field. If there are more
than one recipient of the prize in one field, the prize money is equally distributed
amongst all the winners.
The prize was instituted by a man who was the inventor of the science of
destruction. This scientist was Alfred Bernard Nobel. He was born in
Stockholm, Sweden on October 21, 1833, and died on December 10, 1896.
Though he was a citizen of Sweden, he was educated in Russia. He invented
dynamite. This material is widely used for breaking rocks, digging petrol wells
and also used in wars. For this valuable discovery, Nobel becomes famous all
over the world. He earned a huge amount of money by selling it. At the time of
his death in 1896, Nobel left behind a fabulous sum 90,00,000 dollars. He left a
will indicating that the interest on this money should be given as prizes to
persons for their outstanding contributions to Physics, Chemistry, Medicine,
Literature and Peace. This Prize was named Nobel prize. The first Nobel Prize
was given to Roentgen on 10th December, 1901 for his outstanding research in
X-ray. The prize money was 40,000 dollars. The winners of this prize are treated
with great respect all over the world.
4. Complete the following table with the information given in the passage. 1x5=5
Alfred Bernard Nobel was born| i)... [|
[Nobel Prize waslaunched [| asi *d
Femvomies wasadaedio betas] fa) dP
০০৬০1 7৮75
5. Write a summary of the above passage in your words. 10

q

নব

204 English For Today
6. Match the parts of sentences given in column A, B and C to write five
complete sentences. 1x5=5
a) A book fair is an 1) literature, history, culture, 1) are displayed and sold
exhibition science
b) People in large a . 11) to buy some newly
numbers pay a visit to ii) a great attraction published books
c) There are books of 111) a love of books and 111) sports and religion
iv) the Ekushey Boi Mela iv) for the educated and
d) It has become usually held in the Bangla iv) fort people ৩০2
Academy premises
০) It also instils v) where books of different | ৮) develops the habits of
writers reading books
7. Put the following parts of the story in correct order to make the whole story.
Only the corresponding numbers of the sentences need to be written. 1x8=8
a) And he took shelter in a remove cave.
b) Then he saw a spider trying hard to reach the celling of the cave.
c) Robert Bruce was a famous king.
d) One day he was lying in the cave.
e) This king fought bravely but lost the battle.
f) The king was always in a gloomy state for his unhappy conditions.
g) Enemies invaded his kingdom.
h) He had to flee from his kingdom to save his life.
8. Answer any five of the following questions from the poems in your texbook. 2x5=10
a) According to the poem Two Mothers Remembered, What should
children do to their mother and why?
b) When do you have many friends and when do they leave you? Write
the answer according to the poem Solitude?
c) What does the poet mean by useless years in the poem O Me! O
11161
0) What benefits do you think reading books can give you according to
the poet of Books?
e) Why did the poet stop by the woods in the poem Stopping by Woods
on a Snowy Evening?
f) What was the weather like when Mary went to bring the cattle home in
the poem The Sands of Dee?
g) Why does the poet call time an Old Gipsy Man?
h) Guess what promise the poet had to keep before he would sleep in his Q
poem Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening? N

Graffiti 205

9. Answer any five of the following questions from the stories in your textbook. 2x5=10
a) In the story The Purple Jar, how did the milliners shop look like?

b) What made Rosamond finally decide to buy the purple jar?

০) Why did Shylock get a bond signed by Antonio in the story A Pound
of Flesh?

d) Why did Portias father make a strange plan in the story The Three
Caskets?

e) What do you think about mother son relationship according to the story
Mr. Moti?

f) What is the importance of gender in the story Girl?

g) What do you mean by the statement a joy that kills in The Story of
an Hour?

h) What did Portia say regarding mercy in the story The Trial?

Part A: Writing (Marks-30)

10. Read the beginning of a story. Add at least ten new sentences to
complete the story. Give a suitable title to it. 15
Rana was running late for work, as usual. His morning routine was a busy
one-skipping breakfast, barely managing to catch the bus. That morning, as
he rushed out of his house, his phone rang. It was his mother. He declined
the call thinking to call her back later.........

11. Suppose, you are Meghla and your brother is Akash. You want to go to
your village home with your brother. You like to go there by train but your
brother likes bus journey.

Write a dialogue between you and your brother about the comfort and
discomfort of bus journey.
Suggested Answers

1. a) it. Muslims
b) 1. 1985
c) 111. Bagerhat
d) iii. brick
e) 1. evidential
f) i. Turkish
g) 11. hindrance

q
=

206 English For Today

2. a) "World Heritage" refers to places or sites that are inherited from the past
and passed on to future generations of the entire world. These sites are
recognized for their cultural or natural significance.

b) Khalifatabad was a Muslim colony founded by the Turkish general Ulugh
Khan Jahan in the 15th century. It is located near Bagerhat and is known
for its Islamic architecture, including the Shat Gambuj Mosque.

c) The floor of the mosque is made of brick.

d) Khan Jahan Ali built a network of roads, bridges, public buildings, and
reservoirs to make the city habitable. He also constructed mosques and
monuments.

e) Yes, the decoration of the Shat Gambuj Mosque is unique because its
architectural design combines Mughal and Turkish styles. It is a
remarkable example of Islamic architecture.

3. a) broader b) recognized ০) traditional
d) warrior e) uphold
4, 1. Stockholm ii. 1901
iii. 1969 iv. 1901
V. Outstanding research in X-ray
5. The Nobel Prize is awarded annually for outstanding contributions in
Physics, Chemistry, Medicine, Literature, Peace, and Economics. It was
established by Alfred Nobel, the inventor of dynamite, who left his
fortune to fund the prizes. The first Nobel Prize was awarded in 1901 to
Roentgen for his work on X-rays. Winners receive a gold medal, a
certificate, and a cash prize. The Nobel Prize is globally recognized as
the most prestigious award.
6. a) ৮71 A book fair is an exhibition where books of different writers
are displayed and sold.
b) iv+ii People in large numbers pay a visit to the Ekushey Boi Mela
to buy some newly published books.
০) 17111017516 are books of literature, history, culture, science sports
and religion.
d) 1171৮ It has become a great attraction for the educated and
cultured people
e) 1117৮ It also instils a love of books and develops the habits of
reading books.
a
S

Graffiti 207
7 {1 [2 [3 [4 [5 [6 [7 |
০15 je 17 [a [d | bl 
8. a) According to the poem Two Mothers Remembered, children
should love and respect their mothers because they sacrifice
everything for their children.

b) According to the poem Solitude, you have many friends when you
are happy, but they leave you when you are in trouble.

c) In the poem O Me! O Life!, the poet refers to useless years as
the time spent without purpose or achievement.

d) According to the poem Books, reading books can provide
knowledge, wisdom, and inspiration.

e) In the poem; Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening, the poet
stopped by the woods to admire their beauty and tranquility.

f) In the poem The Sands of Dee, the weather was stormy and harsh
when Mary went to bring the cattle home.

g) The poet calls time an Old Gipsy Man because time is
unpredictable and constantly moves forward.

h) In the poem Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening, the poet
had promises to keep, likely responsibilities or commitments, before
he could sleep.

9. a) In the story The Purple Jar, the milliners shop looked attractive
and colorful, filled with various items.

b) Rosamond decided to buy the purple jar because she found it
beautiful and unique.

c) Shylock got a bond signed by Antonio to ensure repayment of the
loan, with the condition of taking a pound of flesh if Antonio failed
to repay.

d) Portias father made a strange plan to ensure that only a worthy
suitor would marry his daughter by choosing the correct casket.

e) According to the story Mr. Moti, the mother-son relationship is
based on love, care, and mutual understanding.

f) In the story Girl, gender plays a significant role in defining
societal expectations and responsibilities.

g) The statement a joy that kills in The Story of an Hour refers to

q the overwhelming shock and joy that ultimately leads to the
নি protagonists death.

208 English For Today
10. A Lesson in Priorities
Rana was running late for work, as usual. His morning routine was a busy
oneskipping breakfast, barely managing to catch the bus. That morning,
as he rushed out of his house, his phone rang. It was his mother. He
declined the call, thinking to call her back later. On the bus, he felt a pang
of guilt but brushed it off, focusing on his workday ahead. At the office, he
was swamped with meetings and deadlines. By evening, he finally
checked his phone and saw multiple missed calls from his mother. He got
worried and he called her back. His mothers voice trembled as she told
him his father had been hospitalized. Ranas heart sank. He realized he had
been too busy to prioritize his family. He rushed to the hospital, where his
father was recovering. From that day on, Rana promised to balance work
and family, understanding that some things are more important than a busy
schedule.
11. Myself: Hey brother, have you thought about how were going to our
village home this weekend?

Akash: Hi! Yes, I was just thinking about it. I think we should take the
bus. Its faster and more convenient.

Myself: Hmm, I was actually leaning toward taking the train. Its more

comfortable, and we can relax during the journey.

Akash: But the bus is cheaper, and we dont have to wait for scheduled

departures. We can leave whenever we want.

Myself: Thats true, but buses are often crowded, especially on
weekends. It can get really uncomfortable.

Akash: I agree, but trains can also be crowded, and sometimes they get
delayed. At least with the bus, we can enjoy the scenery along the
way.

Myself: Thats a good point, but trains are safer, and theres less chance
of getting stuck in traffic. Plus, we can walk around and stretch
our legs.

Akash: I see your point, but buses are more flexible. We can choose any
time to leave, and there are usually more options available.

Myself: How about we compromise? Lets take the train this time and try

the bus on our next trip. That way, we can experience both.

Akash: That sounds like a good plan. Lets do it!

Myself: Great! I'll book the train tickets tonight. Thanks for discussing it
with me.

Akash: No problem. Im looking forward to the trip. See you later!

Myself: See you! S

AN
The End

2026 Academic Year
Nine and Ten : English For Today
A thing of beauty is a joy for ever.
 2h iy 7
ERC NIG
AWE Orit D@
For free distribution by the Government of the Peoples Republic of Bangladesh.